
# Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 
## CONCRETE

REINFORCEMENT
And
DETALING

# HANDBOOK ON CONCRETE REINFORCEMENT AND DETAILING

# SP 34 : 1987 



## PRICE Rs.600.00

PRINTED IN INDIA
AT NUTAN PRINTERS, F-89/12, OKHLA INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI-110020 AND PUBLISHED BY
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS, NEW DELHI-110 002

# FOREWORD 

Users of various civil engineering codes have been feeling the need for explanatory handbooks and other compilations based on Indian Standards. The need has been further emphasized in view of the publication of the National Building Code of India in 1970 and its implementation. The Expert Group set up in 1972 by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India carried out in-depth studies in various areas of civil engineering and construction practices. During the preparation of the Fifth Five-Year Plan in 1975, the Group was assigned the task of producing a Science and Technology plan for research, development and extension work in the sector of housing and construction technology. One of the items of this plan was the production of design handbooks, explanatory handbooks and design aids based on the National Building Code and various Indian Standards and other activities in the promotion of the National Building Code. The Expert Group gave high priority to this item and on the recommendation of the Department of Science and Technology, the Planning Commission approved the following two projects which were assigned to the Bureau of Indian Standards :
a) Development programme on code implementation for building and civil engineering construction, and
b) Typification for industrial buildings.

A Special Committee for Implementation of Science and Technology Projects (SCIP) consisting of experts connected with different aspects was set up in 1974 to advise the BIS Directorate General in identification and for guiding the development of the work. Under the first programme, the Committee has so far identified subjects for several explanatory handbooks/compilations covering appropriate Indian Standards codes specifications which include the following:

Design Aids for Reinforced Concrete to IS : 456-1978 (SP : 16-1980)
Explanatory Handbook on Masonry Code (SP : 20-1981)
Explanatory Handbook
on Codes of Earthquake Engineering (IS : 1893-1975 and
IS : 4326-1976) (SP : 22-1982)
Handbook on Concrete Mixes (SP : 23-1982)
Explanatory Handbook on Indian Standard Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced Concrete (IS : 456-1978) (SP : 24-1983)
Handbook on Causes and Prevention of Cracks in Buildings (SP : 25-1984)
Summaries of Indian Standards for Building Materials (SP : 21-1983)
Functional Requirements of Industrial Buildings (Lighting and Ventilation) (SP : 32-1986)
Timber Engineering (SP : 33-1986)
Water Supply and Drainage with Special Emphasis on Plumbing (SP : 35-1987)
Functional Requirements of Buildings*
Foundation of Buildings
Steel Code (IS : 800-1984)
Building Construction Practices
Bulk Storage Structures in Steel
Formwork
Fire Safety
Construction Safety Practices

# Tall Buildings 

## Loading Code

This Handbook provides information on properties of reinforcing steel and detailing requirements, including storage, fabrication, assembly, welding and placing of reinforcement in accordance with IS : 456-1978. As a result of the introduction of limit state method of design for reinforced concrete structures and the concept of development length, detailing has become extremely important as many of the design requirements are to be met through detailing. This Handbook is expected to guide the designer in detailing which include correct positioning of bar for a particular type of structural element and preparation of bar bending schedule. The detailing requirements as specified in IS : 4561978 have been brought out as applicable to different structural elements in a building and explained, wherever necessary. The relevant Indian Standards and other literature available on the subject have been taken into consideration in preparing the Handbook. The Handbook will be useful to concrete design engineers, field engineers and students of civil engineering.

Some of the important points to be kept in view in the use of the Handbook are :
a) The reinforcement has to cater to forces (bending moment, shear force, direct compression or direct tension) at sections consistant with development length requirements at the particular section. Sound engineering judgement shall be exercized while applying the provisions herein and detailing should be such that the structural element satisfies the requirements of performance for which it is meant. Typical detailing drawings are included to illustrate one possible method of arrangement of bars for a particular condition. They should not be construde as the only possible method.
b) Considering the importance of ductility requirements in structures subjected to severe earthquakes, a separate section is included on the detailing requirements for buildings in severe earthquake zones (Zones IV and V of IS : 1893-1984).
c) International Standard ISO 4066-1977 'Buildings and civil engineering drawingsBar scheduling' is reproduced in Appendix B as a supplement to what is contained in the Handbook.
d) The Handbook does not form part of any Indian Standard on the subject and does not have the status of an Indian Standard. In case of dispute about interpretation or opinion expressed in the Handbook, the provisions of relevant Indian Standards only shall apply. The provisions of the Handbook particularly those relating $t$. other literature should be considered as only supplementart information
e) The Handbook is expected to serve as a companion document to the three handbooks already published on the subject of reinforced concrete, namely, SP : 16-1980, SP : 23-1982 and SP : 24-1983.
f) All dimensions are in mm unless otherwise specified.

The Handbook is based on the first draft prepared by the Central Public Works Depart-ment, New Delhi. Shri B. R. Narayanappa, Deputy Director, and Shri P. S. Chadha, Officer on Special Duty, Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), were associated with the work. The assistance rendered by Shri A. C. Gupta, Assistant Chief Design Engineer, National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), New Delhi, in the preparation of this Handbook specially in the formulation of drawings is acknowledged.

The draft Handbook was circulated for review to National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi; Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras; Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; Andhra Pradesh Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad; Engineering Construction Corporation Ltd, Madras; Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi; Engineering Consultants (India) Limited, New Delhi; Gammon India Ltd, Bombay; M/s C. R. Narayana Kao, Architects \& Engineers, Madras; STUP Consultants Ltd, Bombay; Research, Design and Standards Organization, Ministry of Railways, Lucknow; Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat; M/s H. K. Sen and Associates, Calcutta; Siddharth Shankar and Associates (Consulting Engineers), New Delhi; Roy and Partners (Architects \& Engineers), New Delhi; Shrish Malpani (Architects \& Engineers), New Delhi; and the views received were taken into consideration while finalizing the Handbook.

# CONTENTS 

Page
Section 1 Steel for reinforcement ..... 1
Section 2 Detailing functions ..... 9
Section 3 Structural drawing for detailing ..... 13
Section 4 General detailing requirements ..... 27
Section 5 Bar bending schedule (including do's and dont's in detailing) ..... 53
Section 6 Foundations ..... 67
Section 7 Columns ..... 83
Section 8 Beams ..... 97
Section 9 Floor slabs ..... 119
Section 10 Stairs ..... 143
Section 11 Special structures-deep beams, walls, shells and folded plates, water tanks, RC hinges, concrete pipes, machine foundations, and shear walls ..... 153
Section 12 Ductility requirements of earthquake resistant building ..... 187
Section 13 Transport, storage, fabrication, assembly and placing of steel reinforcement ..... 193
Section 14 Typical structural drawings ..... 205
Appendix A Welding ..... 209
Appendix B ISO 4066-1977 Building and civil engineering drawings-bar scheduling ..... 221
Appendix C Dimensions and properties of hard-drawn steel wire fabric and other bars ..... 227

# SECTION 1 

Steel for Reinforcement

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 1 

## STEEL FOR REINFORCEMENT

1.0 Reinforcing bars/wires for concrete reinforcement shall be any of the following conforming to accepted standards:
a) Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars [IS : 432 (Part 1)-1982 Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement : Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars (third revision)].
b) High strength deformed steel bars/wires [IS : 1786-1985 Specification for high strength deformed steel bars and wires for concrete reinforcement (third revision).
c) Hard-drawn steel wire fabric [IS : 1566-1982 Specification for hard-drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement (second revision)].
The requirements for manufacture and supply of different types of steel reinforcement are briefly highlighted in 1.1 to 1.3.4.3.

Note - Different types of reinforcing bars, such as plain bars and deformed bars of various grades, say Fe415 ( $\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ ) and $\mathrm{Fe} 500\left(\mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}\right.$ ), should not be used side by side as this practice will lead to confusion and error at site. However, secondary reinforcement such as ties and stirrups, may be of mild steel throughout even though the main steel may be of high strength deformed bars.

### 1.1 Mild Steel and Medium Tensile Steel Bars

1.1.1 Reinforcement supplied shall be classified into the following types:
a) mild steel bars, and
b) medium tensile steel bars.
1.1.1.1 Mild steel bars shall be supplied in the following two grades:
a) mild steel bars, Grade I; and
b) mild steel bars, Grade II.

Note - In all cases where the design seismic coefficient [see IS : 1893-1984 Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures (fourth revision)] chosen for the structure is 0.05 or more (which include earthquake zones IV and V) and for structures subjected to dynamic loading, use of Grade II bars is not recommended.
1.1.2 Physical/Mechanical Properties - The requirements for physical/mechanical properties of mild steel and medium tensile steel bars are given in Table 1.1.
1.1.3 Tolerance - The rolling and cutting tolerances shall be as specified in 1.1.3.1 and 1.1.3.2.
1.1.3.1 Bars in straight lengths
a) The tolerance on diameter shall be as follows:

| Diameter |  | Tolerance, <br> percent |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Over | Up to and <br> including |  |
| mm | mm | mm |
| - | 25 | $\pm 0.5$ |
| 25 | 35 | $\pm 0.6$ |
| 35 | 50 | $\pm 0.8$ |
| 50 | 80 | $\pm 1.0$ |
| 80 | 100 | $\pm 1.3$ |
| 100 | - | $\pm 1.6$ |

b) The permissible ovality measured as the difference between the maximum and minimum diameter shall be 75 percent of the tolerance ( $\pm$ ) specified on diameter.
c) The tolerance on weight per $m$ length shall be as follows:

| Diameter |  | Tolerance, <br> percent |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Over | Up to and <br> including |  |
| mm | mm |  |
| - | 10 | $\pm 7$ |
| 10 | 16 | $\pm 5$ |
| 16 | - | $\pm 3$ |

### 1.1.3.2 Coiled bars

a) The tolerance on diameter shall be $\pm 0.5 \mathrm{~mm}$ for diameters up to and including 12 mm .
b) The difference between the maximum and minimum diameter at any cross-section shall not exceed 0.65 mm .

Note - No weight tolerance is specified for coiled bars.

### 1.2 High Strength Deformed Steel Bars

1.2.1 Deformed steel bars/wires for use as reinforcement in concrete shall be in the following three grades:
a) Fe415,
b) Fe500, and
c) Fe550.

| IS No. | TYPE OF REINFORCEMENT | (Clauses 1.1.4, 1.2.2, 1.2.5 and 1.3.1) |  |  |  |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  | NOMINAL SIZE OF BARS | CHARACTERISTIC STRENGTH (Yield Stress or 2 Percent Proof Stress) | MINIMUM ULTIMATE TENSILE STRESS | COMPOSITION OF STEEL CONFORMING TO IS | MINIMUM ELONGATION ON GUAGE LENGTH OF 5.65-ABEA  |
|  (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7)  |
|   |  | (mm) | (N/mm²) | (N/mm²) |  | (percent)  |
|  IS : 432 (Part 1)-1982* | Mild steel (Grade I) | 5,6,8,10,12,16,20 | 250 | 410 | IS : 226-1975† | 23  |
|   |  | 22,25,28,32,36,40,45,50 | 240 |  |  |   |
|   | Mild steel (Grade II) | 5,6,8,10,12,16,20 | 225 | 370 | Fe 410.0 of IS : 1977-1975‡ | 23  |
|   |  | 22,25,28,32,36,40,45,50 | 215 |  |  |   |
|   | Medium tensile steel | 5,6,8,10,12,16 | 350 | 540 | Fe 540 W-HT of IS : 961-1975§ | 20  |
|   |  | 20,22,25,28,32 | 340 |  |  |   |
|   |  | 36,40,45,50 | 330 | 510 | do | 20  |
|  IS : 1786-1985|| | High strength deformed bars/wires | 4,5,6,7,8,10,12,16,18,20,22,25,28,32,36,40,45,50 | 415 (for Fe 415) | 10 percent more than the actual 0.2 percent proof stress but not less than 485.0 N/mm² | C - 0.30 - 0.06 P - 0.06 S + P - 0.11 | 14.5  |
|   |  |  | 500 (for Fe 500) | 8 percent more than the actual 0.2 percent proof stress but not less than 545.0 N/mm² | C - 0.3 - 0.055 P - 0.055 S + P - 0.105 | 12.0  |

HANDBOOK ON CONCRETE REINFORCEMENT AND DETAINING

|  IS No. | TYPE OF REINFORCEMENT | NOMINAL SIZE OF BARS | CHARACTERISTIC STRENGTH (Yield Stress or 2 Percent Proof Stress) | MINIMUM ULTIMATE TENSILE STRESS | COMPOSITION OF STEEL CONFORMING TO IS | MINIMUM ELONGATION ON GUAGE LENGTH OF 5.65-AREA  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7)  |
|   |  | (mm) | (N/mm²) | (N/mm²) |  | (percent)  |
|   |  |  | 550 (for Fe 550) | 6 percent more than the actual 0.2 percent proof stress but not less than 585 N/mm² | C - 0.3 - 0.055 P - 0.050 S + P - 0.10 | 8.0  |
|  IS : 1566-1981|| | Hard-drawn steel wire fabric | (See Note 1) | 480 | 570 | S - 0.05 P - 0.05 | 7.5 (over a gauge length of 8 4)  |

NOTE 1 - The mesh sizes and sizes of wire for square as well as oblong welded wire fabric commonly manufactured in the country are given in Appendix C

NOTE 2 - The weight and area of different sizes of bars are given in Appendix C.

NOTE 3 - Generally available ex stock: Mild steel bars - 46, 10, 12, 16, 20, 25, 32 Deformed steel bars - 88, 10, 12, 16, 20, 22, 25, 32 The maximum length of reinforcing bars available ex stock is 13 m.

NOTE 4 - For each bundle/coil of bars/wires, a tag shall be attached indicating cast No./lot No., grade and size by the manufacturer or the supplier.

*Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part I Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars (third revision). †Specification for structural steel (standard quality) (fifth revision). ‡Specification for structural steel (ordinary quality) (second revision). §Specification for structural steel (high quality) (second revision). #Specification for high strength deformed steel bars and wires for concrete reinforcement (third revision). ||Specification for hard-drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement (second revision).

Note - The figures following the symbol Fe indicates the specified minimum 0.2 percent proof stress or yield stress in $\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

### 1.2.3 Tolerance

1.2.3.1 Cutting tolerance on length - The cutting tolerances on length shall be as specified below:
a) When the specified length is +75 mm not stated to be either a -25 mm maximum or a minimum
b) When the minimum length is +50 mm specified

$$
-0 \mathrm{~mm}
$$

Note - These are tolerances for manufacture and supply and are not applicable for fabrication. For allowable tolerances for bending and cutting during fabrication see Section 13.
1.2.3.2 Mass - For the purpose of checking the nominal mass, the density of steel shall be taken as $0.785 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ of the cross-sectional area per metre run. Tolerances on nominal mass shall be as follows:

| Nominal Size <br> mm | Tolerance on the Nominal Mass, <br> Percent when Checked in |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | Batch <br> (each <br> Specimen <br> not less <br> than <br> 0.5 m ) | Indivi- <br> dual <br> Sample <br> (not less <br> than <br> 0.5 m ) | Indivi- <br> dual <br> Sample <br> for <br> Coils* |
| Up to and <br> including 10 | $\pm 7$ | -8 | $\pm 8$ |
| over 10 up to <br> and includ- <br> ing 16 | $\pm 5$ | -6 | $\pm 6$ |
| Over 16 | $\pm 3$ | -4 | $\pm 4$ |

1.2.4 Physical/ Mechanical Properties - The requirement for physical/mechanical properties of high strength deformed steel bars are given in Table 1.1.

Note 1 - the nominal diameter or size of a deformed bar/wire is equivalent diameter or size of a plain round bar/wire having the same mass per metre length as the deformed bar/wire.

Note 2 - The effective diameter, $\phi$, of a deformed bar/wire is determined as follows, using a bar/wire not less than 0.5 m in length:

$$
\phi=\sqrt{\frac{162.13 w}{L}}
$$

where
$w=$ mass in kg weighed to a precision of $\pm 0.5$ percent, and
$L=$ length in $m$ measured to a precision of $\pm 0.5$ percent.

[^0]
### 1.3 Hard-drawn Steel Wire Fabric

1.3.1 General - Hard-drawn steel wire fabric consists of longitudinal and transverse wires (at right angles to one another) joined by resistance spot welding. Fabrication of wire fabric by welding has the quality of factory fabrication and reduces cost of labour and fabrication in the field.
1.3.2 Types - Hard-drawn steel wire fabric shall be made in the following two types:
a) square mesh, and
b) oblong mesh.

The diameter of wires in the square mesh varies from 3 to 10 mm ; the diameter being same irt both longitudinal and transverse directions. In this case both longitudinal and transverse bars may serve as main reinforcement. The diameter of wire in the oblong mesh varies from 5 to 8 mm in the longitudinal direction and 4.2 to 6 mm in the transverse direction. The wires in the direction of larger diameter can serve as main reinforcement and the wires in the cross direction can serve as distribution steel.
1.3.2.1 The maximum width of wire fabric in rolls is 3.5 m ; the length of this type of fabric is limited by the weight of rolls which may range from 100 to 500 kg . The maximum width of fabric in the form of sheets is 2.5 m and the maximum length is 9.0 m . The dimension of width is to be taken as centre-to-centre distance between outside longitudinal wires. The width of wires fabric in rolls or sheets shall be such as to fit in with the modular size of 10 cm module and length in suitable intervals (see Fig. (1.1).

Fig. 1.1 Welded Wire Fabric


[^0]:    *For coils, batch tolerance is not applicable. At least 2 samples of minimum one metre length shall be taken from each end of the coil.

1.3.2.2 The fabric may be designated for ordering purposes by the number of the standard and the reference number given as in the first column of Table C-1 of Appendix C, or alternately a complete description of the fabric may be given.

When denoting the size of rolls or sheets of oblong mesh fabric, the first dimension shall be the length of the main wires.
Example : Hard-drawn steel wire fabric according to IS : 1566 corresponding to SI No. $5: 50$ sheets of size $5 \mathrm{~m} \times 2 \mathrm{~m}$
1.3.3 Mass - The nominal mass of fabric shall be calculated on the basis that steel weighs $0.785 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ of nominal cross-sectional area per metre run.

### 1.3.4 Tolerances

1.3.4.1 Tolerance on size of mesh - The number of spaces between the external wires in a sheet or roll shall be determined by the nominal pitch. The centre-to-centre distance between two adjacent wires shall not vary by more than 7.5 percent from the nominal pitch. The maximum variation in the size of any mesh shall be not more than 5 percent over or under the specified size, and the average mesh size shall be such that the
total number of meshes contained in a sheet or roll is not less than that determined by the nominal pitch.
1.3.4.2 Tolerance on size of sheet - when fabric is required to be cut to specified dimensions, the tolerance shall be as follows:
a) for dimensions of 25 mm under or over 5 m and under the specified dimensions
b) For dimensions over 5 m
$1 / 2$ percent under or over the specified dimension.

Note - These are tolerances for manufacture and supply and are not applicable for fabrication.
1.3.4.3 Tolerance on weight of fabric - The tolerance on the weight of fabric shall be as follows:
a) When the specified weight $\pm 6$ percent is not stated to be either a maximum or a minimum
b) When the specified weight $+0$
is stated to be maximum $\quad-12$ percent
c) When the specified weight -12 percent is stated to be a minimum -0

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 2 

Detailing Functions

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 2 

## DETAILING FUNCTIONS

2.1 General-In preparing drawings and bending schedules, the following factors shall be kept in view:
a) The engineer's design and the design requirements;
b) The cutting and bending of the reinforcement;
c) The placing and wiring in position of reinforcement;
d) The maintaining of the position of reinforcement;
e) The preassembly of cages;
f) Concreting;
g) The accommodation of other trades and services;
h) The measurement of quantities; and
j) Economy in the use of steel.
2.2 Design - The following requirements of the designer shall be borne in mind:
a) The quantity, location and cover of steel reinforcement should be simply, correctly and clearly shown.
b) The placing drawings and bending schedules should be adequately cross-referenced, easily read and capable of easy checking in the drawing office and on site.
c) It should be possible to locate a detail readily, should a doubt arise.
d) One detailer should be able to take over from another with a minimum of delay and direction.
e) Detailing should be done in such a way that secondary stresses caused by support conditions, shrinkage, temperature variations, bursting effects of laps and splices, and stress concentrations arising from hooks and bends are counteracted.
2.3 Cutting and Bending - Prepare bending schedules on standard size sheets small enough to facilitate handling by clerical, fabrication and placing personnel.

Standardize cutting lengths and ensure that bending details are simple and easy to read. So compile the schedules that delivery of the required reinforcement for each component can be effected without the need for abstracting from schedules.

The system of bar-referencing should be coherent and systematic, and should lend itself to easy identification and to use in computer systems, if necessary.
2.4 Placing and Wiring in Position - Ensure that drawings are simple, pictorially clear, and adequately detailed to enable the fixer to place bars exactly where required. Avoid crowding drawings with information by detailing by components and also if necessary by preparing separate details for bottom and top steel in slabs. Ensure that reinforcing steel that connects elements to be cast at different times is so detailed that it is included with the portion to be cast first, for example, splice bars for columns, continuity reinforcing for beams and slabs to be cast in portions. If the order of casting is not clear, detail splices in one of the sections with suitable crossreferences. Where the complexity of the detail is such that an out of the ordinary sequence is required to place the reinforcement, ensure that such sequence is shown on the detail.
2.5 Maintaining Position of Reinforcement Reinforcement that has been placed and wired in position should not be displaced before or during the concreting operation. Ensure that bar supports and cover blocks are so scheduled or specified as to maintain correct bottom and side cover and that high chairs and stools are detailed to support upper reinforcement mats at the correct level.
2.6 Preassembly of Cages and Mats - Where required, so detail the reinforcement to components such as columns, foundations, beams, and walls that it can be conveniently preassembled before being placed in position. Ensure that assembled units are sturdy enough to stand up to handling and erection, and that they are not so heavy that they cannot be lifted by the men or equipment available for the work.
2.7 Concreting - Ensure that the reinforcement can be so spaced as to allow placing and efficient consolidation of the concrete.
2.8 Other Trades and Services - Take note of the positions of down pipes (especially inlets and outlets), sleeves, pipes, and electrical conduits, whether shown on the structural layout or not. To avoid site difficulties, show them on the reinforcement details where necessary.
2.9 Measurement of Quantities - It is important that the quantity surveyor and the contractor should be able to compute the mass of

steel used at any stage in a contract. Bending schedules prepared as recommended in 2.3 will assist in meeting this requirement. Ensure that placing drawings and bending schedules are adequately cross-referenced and that all revisions are suitably recorded. If, in the case of a revision, there is any possibility of doubt, prepare separate schedules showing only the revision, with adequate cross-referencing.
2.10 Economy in Use of Steel - The type of steel used is generally specified by the designer but
bear in mind that up to one-third of the mass of steel can be saved by using high tensile steel instead of mild steel. The saving can be considerable as the difference of cost between the rates for mild steel and high tensile steel placed in position is relatively small. Furthermore, as the rates for small diameters are higher than those for large diameters, it is desirable to use the largest available size of bar within the design requirements. Larger bars also produce stiffer cages and are not easily displaced.

# SECTION 3 

Structural Drawing for Detailing

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 3 

## STRUCTURAL DRAWING FOR DETAILING

3.1 Size of Drawing - The structural drawing for a large project should generally be of one size, for convenience both in the drawing office and on the site. The preferred sizes of drawing sheets are given in Table 3.1.

| TABLE 3.1 DRAWING SHEET SIZES |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| $\begin{gathered} \text { Sl. } \\ \text { No. } \end{gathered}$ | Designation | Trimmed Size | Untrimmed Size (Min) |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) |
|  |  | $\mathrm{mm} \times \mathrm{mm}$ | $\mathrm{mm} \times \mathrm{mm}$ |
| i) | A0 | $841 \times 1189$ | $880 \times 1230$ |
| ii) | A1 | $594 \times 841$ | $625 \times 880$ |
| iii) | A2 | $420 \times 594$ | $450 \times 625$ |
| iv) | A3 | $297 \times 420$ | $330 \times 450$ |
| v) | A4 | $210 \times 297$ | $240 \times 330$ |
| vi) | A5 | $148 \times 210$ | $165 \times 240$ |

3.1.1 The dimensions recommended for all margins and the divisions of drawing sheets into zones are given in Fig. 3.1 (A to F).
3.1.1.1 The title block is an important feature in a drawing and should be placed at the bottom right-hand corner of the sheet, where it is :eadily seen when the prints are folded in the prescribed manner. The size of the title block recommended is $185 \times 65 \mathrm{~mm}$.
3.1.2 Separate sheets should be used for each type of structural member or unit so that a floor slab would be detailed on one sheet, beams on another, and columns on a further sheet, etc. Alternatively, for small jobs each standard size sheet could be used to detail one floor of the structure so that the ground floor slab, beams and columns could be detailed on one sheet and the first floor members on another.
3.1.3 Layout - There cannot be a single standard layout for the detailing of reinforced concrete drawings. However, it is the usual practice to draw the (key) plan in the upper left hand corner of the sheet, with the elevations and details below and on to the right side of the plan. Schedules and bending details are placed in the upper right corner of the drawing. Figure 3.2 gives a broad outline of layout recommended. In large projects, the bending schedule can be omitted from individual drawings and a separate bending schedule drawing may be prepared.
3.2 Scale of Drawing - Scales shall be so chosen as to bring out the details clearly and to keep the drawings within workable size. The choice of scale will depend at the discretion of the
detailer/designer and no general recommendations can be given in this respect. Some commonly used scales are given below as examples:

Plan $\quad-1: 100,1: 50$
Elevation.-1:5, 1:30
Sections - 1:50, 1:30, 1:25, 1:20, 1:15, $1: 10$

### 3.3 Information to be Shown on Structural Drawings

3.3.1 The overall sizes of the concrete members shall include the sizes of any necessary chamfers and fillets at corners. Also, the exact position, shape, size and spacing of the reinforcement within concrete members, as well as the required dimensions of the concrete cover to the reinforcement shall be given.
3.3.2 The position of any holes required in the members for service pipes and details of any pipes or other fixings to be cast-in with the concrete, and also, the position and details of construction joints and special recesses, etc, shall be indicated.
3.3.3 When foundations or ground floor slabs are detailed, information regarding the underside conditions shall be shown, such as the use of waterproof paper, the thickness of blinding (the lean layer of concrete), if required.
3.3.4 Notes should be used freely on detailed drawings. The most important being the 'bar marks' which give information about each, or a series of similar reinforcing bars. The notes should be concise and precise, and shall not be ambiguous. The notes which apply to the whole drawings, such as the specifications of the concrete to be used, size of chamfers and fillets, and concrete cover, etc, can be placed under a general heading at the bottom or side of the drawing.
3.3.5 The beams, wall slabs, floor slabs and columns, etc, the main dimensions of the structure, such as the distances between columns, heights between floors, beam and column sizes, and floor and wall thicknesses, etc, as calculated by the design engineer shall also be shown on the drawings.

Sections shall be drawn to atleast twice the scale of plans or elevations to which they refer, while complicated joints such as may occur at the intersections of columns and beams may be detailed to larger scale, say $1: 4$.


# FOLDING MARK

All dimensions in millimetres.

## 3.1A AO SHEET LAYOUT


All dimensions in millimetres
3.IB AI SHEET LAYOUT

All dimensions in millimetres.
3.1C A2 SHEET LAYOUT

3.ID A3 SIZE
3.1F A5 SIZE

DIVISION OF ZONES
3.1G DIVISION OF ZONES

All dimensions in millimetres.
Fig. 3.1 Margins and Division of Zones for Different Drawing Sheets


Fig. 3.2 Typical Layout of a Drawing
3.3.6 Structural drawings prepared by the designer shall show details of reinforcement and all other information needed for detailing the reinforcement. The drawings shall also indicate, by separate notes, live loads, concrete strength, quality and grade of steel, number of bars to be lapped and lengths of the laps, and if necessary special instructions regarding erection of formwork, fabrication and placing of steel.
3.3.7 It is convenient to detail the reinforcement by units which generally consist of footings, walls, columns, each floor and roof. A separate structural drawing supplemented by bar bending schedule should preferably be made for each unit. For small structures, the entire requirements may be handled as one unit. For a large project a particular unit such as floor may be divided to correspond with the construction schedule.
3.3.8 To ensure that all the reinforcement is properly placed or positioned in a unit, longitudinal section or cross-section should be shown in addition to plan and elevation of the unit on which the bars are shown.
3.3.9 The drawing should be complete and clear so as to leave no doubt on any point of construction. Complete and accurate dimensions shall be shown. Clear and adequate details for
special and unusual condition shall be given to ensure proper placing of reinforcement. Details of covers and intersections of walls, construction joints, window and door openings, and similar special features should be shown in the relevant drawings alongwith sketches, if necessary.
3.3.10 For clear demarcation of reinforcement bars, those in the near face shall be shown in full lines and those that are placed in the far face shall be shown in dotted lines.
3.3.11 All bars, straight or bent requiring hooks bends, shall be properly designated by the designer or a note to this effect included in the drawing.
3.3.12 Lengths of laps, points of bend, cut-off points and extension of bars should be specified by the designer. The dimensions $L / 7, L / 5$ and $L / 4$, etc. shown on typical drawings shall not be used unless justified by structural analysis.
3.3.13 Wherever possible, all control and construction joints should be indicated on structural drawings and constructional details provided for such joints.
3.3.14 Notes and Instructions - Any ambiguity and scope for misinterpretation of instructions shall be avoided. All instructions shall be in imperative form, specific, brief and clear.

3.3.15 Schedules - The reinforcement details of slabs, beams, columns and many other parts of structures may be effectively shown on working drawings in a tabular form, known as a schedule (see Section 5).
3.4 Symbols and Abbreviations - Symbols and abbreviations to be adopted in the drawings for reinforced concrete construction are given in 3.4.1 to 3.5.6. All reinforcement bars used in the structures shall be suitably designated and numbered both on drawing and schedule.
3.4.1 Symbols Relating to Cross-Sectional Shape and Size of Reinforcement
a) $\phi$ plain round bar or diameter of plain round bar;
b) $\square$ plain square bar or side of plain square bar; and
c) \# deformed bar (including square twisted bar) or nominal size (equivalent diameter or side) of the deformed bar (see Note under 3.4.5).
3.4.2 Symbols Relating to Shape of the Bar along its Lengths

| Alt | Alternate bar |
| :-- | :-- |
| Bt | Bent bar |
| B | Bottom bar |
| min | Minimum |
| max | Maximum |
| St | Straight bar |
| Stp | Stirrup |
| Sp | Spiral |
| Ct | Column tie |
| T | Top bar |

Note Alternatively, all symbols may be in capitals,
3.4.3 Symbols Relating to Position and Direction
EW
Each way
@ Spacing centre-to-centre

| $\longleftrightarrow$ | Limit of area covered by bars <br> Direction in which bars extend |
| :--: | :--: |

### 3.4.4 Symbols Relating to Various Structural Members

| Bm or B | Beams |
| :-- | :-- |
| Col | Column(s) |
| Fg | Footing(s) |
| GR | Girders |
| JT | Joints(s) |
| LL | Lintel(s) |
| LB | Lintel beam(s) |
| Sb or S | Slab(s) |
| WL | Longitudinal wall |
| Wx | Cross wall |
| £ | Centre line |

Note - Alternatively, all symbols may be in capitals,
3.4.5 The symbols, abbreviations and notes shall be used in a manner that will not create any ambiguity. A few examples for representing diameter, spacing, number of bars, etc, are illustrated below:
a) \# 20@ 200 means 20 mm diameter deformed bars spaced at 200 mm centre-tocentre.
b) 20-\# 12 means 20 numbers of 12 mm diameter deformed bars.
c) $\phi 32$-St-12 EW means 12 numbers of 32 mm diameter plain round straight bars in each direction.

Note - The symbol relating to cross-sectional shape and size - $\phi$ or \# is used on the left hand side of the numerical value of the diameter to avoid confusion that it may be interpreted as the number of times the diameter if used on the right hand side of the numerical value of the diameter.
3.4.6 The use of the same type of line for the same purpose considerably enhances the clarity and usefulness of the drawing. The following graphical symbols are suggested:

### 3.5 Marks for Parts of Buildings

3.5.1 Marks are used to designate the different structural members of a structure. Different structural members of a structure shall be marked using symbols, abbreviations and notations indicated in succeeding clauses and in the manner indicated in other clauses.
3.5.2 A key framing plan shall be prepared to a convenient scale and the t.ro axes marked one side with alphabets $A, B, C$, etc, and the other with numbers (see Fig. 3.3). Normally with rectangular pattern, the same key framing plan may be used for all floors. However, if arrangement of beams vary for different floors a separate key framing plan with grid arrangement and areas may be used for each of the floor. The floors shall be specified in accordance with the requirements of IS : 2332-1973 'Specifications for nomenclature of floors and storeys' and abbreviations BT and MZ shall be used for basement and mezzanine, respectively, for example:

BT
MZ
Floor 1
Floor 2
3.5.3 Columns - Columns and foundations shall be specified by grid arrangement giving reference to the floor, for example (see Fig. 3.3A).

FG Col EI Footing for Column EI
Col 2EI Column EI at floor 2
(that is, column for storey 2, or column between floor 2 and 3).
3.5.4 Beams, slabs and lintels, and tie beams shall be consecutively numbered from left-hand top corner (see Fig. 3.3A).
3.5.5 If longitudinal section of the beam is shown, the grid of the column or number of the column supporting the beam is being detailed shall be as indicated as in fig. 3.3B and, if possible, inset on the drawing showing the key framing plan. On the other hand if a beam schedule is included, a table [see Fig. 3.3C] may be prepared and inset on the drawing showing the key framing plan [see Fig. 3.3A].
3.5.5.1 Beams or slabs that are similar may be given in the same number.
3.5.6 Walls - Marking of walls shall be made in the serial order starting from top left corner of plan and proceeding towards the right, followed by subsequent rows in order. Longitudinal walls and cross-walls shall be marked separately (see Fig. 3.4) and identified in the drawing with reference to the serial number of the floor.

## Example

2 WL - 1 Longitudinal wall No. I at floor 2 (between floor 2 and 3).
4 WX - 3 Cross-wall No. 3 at floor 4 (between floor 4 and 5).

Fig. 3.3 Typical Arrangement for the Key Framing Plan and Marking Different Structural Members (Continued)

3.3B

| Beam No. | Floor | Spanning Between | At Level <br> mm |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| $B_{m} 1$ | 1 | $E_{1} \quad G_{1}$ | +3500 |
| $B_{m} 14$ | 1 | $C_{2} \quad C_{2}$ | +3500 |
| $B_{m} 27$ | 1 | $B_{23} \quad B_{21}$ | +3500 |
| $B_{m} 28$ | 1 | $C_{4} \quad C_{6}$ | +3500 |
| $B_{m} 28 A$ <br> (Landing Beam) | 1 | $C_{4} \quad C_{6}$ | +1750 |
| $B_{m} 29$ | 1 | $B_{6} \quad B_{25}$ | +3500 |
| $L_{B} 1$ | 1 | $E_{1} \quad G_{1}$ | +2440 |
| $L_{B} 9$ | 1 | $A_{3} \quad A_{4}$ | +2440 |

3.3 C

Fig. 3.3 Typical Arrangement for the Key Framing Plan and Marking Different Structural Members

Fig. 3.4 Typical Marking Details for Walls

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 4 

General Detailing Requirements

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 4 

## GENERAL DETAILING REQUIREMENTS

4.1 Cover-Reinforcement shall have concrete cover (nominal) and the thickness of such cover (exclusive of plaster or other decorative finish) shall be as follows:
a) At each end of reinforcing bar not less than 25 mm , or twice the diameter of such bar whichever is greater;
b) For a longitudinal reinforcing bar in a column not less than 40 mm or the diameter of such bar whichever is greater. In the case of columns with a minimum dimension of 20 mm or under, whose reinforcing bars do not exceed 12 mm , the cover may be reduced to 25 mm ;
c) For longitudinal reinforcing bar in a beam not less than 25 mm or the diameter of such bar, whichever is greater;
d) For tensile, compressive, shear or other reinforcement in a slab not less than 15 mm or the diameter of such reinforcement, whichever is greater; and
e) For any other reinforcement not less than 15 mm or the diameter of such reinforcement, whichever is greater.
Note - The values of cover suggested are nominal cover as specified in the drawings. The cover shall in no case be reduced by more than one-third of the specified cover or 5 mm whichever is less. During construction it is essential to ensure that these tolerances are met.
4.1.1 Increased cover thickness may be provided when the surfaces of concrete members are exposed to the action of harmful chemicals (as in the case of concrete in contact with earth contaminated with such chemicals), acid, vapour, saline atmosphere, sulphurous smoke (as in the case of steam-operated railways), etc, and such increase of cover may be between 15 and 50 mm over the values given in 4.1 above as may be specified by the Engineer-in-Charge. However, in no case cover should exceed 75 mm .
4.1.2 For reimorced concrete members of marine structures totally immersed in sea water, the cover shall be 40 mm more than that specified in 4.1, but total cover should not exceed 75 mm .
4.1.3 For reinforced concrete structures/ structural members, periodically immersed in sea water or subject to sea spray, the cover of concrete shall be 50 mm more than that specified in 4.1, but total cover should not exceed 75 mm .
4.1.4 For concrete of grade M25 and above, the additional thickness of cover specified in 4.1.1 to 4.1.3 may be reduced by half.

### 4.2 Development of Stress in Reinforcement

4.2.1 Development Length of Bars in Tension or Compression - The calculated tension or compression in any bar at any section shall be developed on each side of the section by an appropriate development length or end anchorage or by a combination thereof.

Note - Development length is the embedded length of reinforcement required to develop the design strength of the reinforcement at a critical section. Critical sections for development of reinforcement in flexural members are at points of maximum stress and at points within the span where adjacent reinforcement terminates, or is bent. Provisions of 4.6 .3 (c) should be satisfied at simple supports and at points of inflection.
4.2.2 The development length $L_{d}$ is given by:

$$
L_{d}=\frac{\phi}{4} \frac{\sigma_{2}}{\tau_{b d}}
$$

where
$\phi=$ nominal diameter of the bar,
$\sigma_{2}=$ stress in bar at the section considered at design load, and
$\tau_{\text {bd }}=$ design bond stress for bars in tension given in 4.2.2.1.
Note 1 - The development includes anchorage values of hooks in tension reinforcement (see 4.3.1).

Note 2 - For bars of sections other than circular, the development length should be sufficient to develop the stress in the bar by bond.

4.2.2.1 Design bond stress in limit state design metliod for plain bars in tension shall be as follows:

Grade of concrete

|  | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 | M35 | M40 |
| :-- | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Design bond | 1.0 | 1.2 | 1.4 | 1.5 | 1.7 | 1.9 |
| stress |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| $\mathrm{T}_{\text {bd }}, \mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ |  |  |  |  |  |  |

For deformed bars, these values shall be increased by 60 percent. For bars in compression, the values of bond stresses for bars in tension shall be increased by 25 percent.
4.3 Anchoring Reinforcing Bars - It is important to note that when a bar is subjected to both tension and compression, the anchorage value should correspond to the one which gives the maximum value, and at the same time individual requirements (with respect to tension and compression) are also satisfied as specified in 4.3.1 to 4.3.3.

### 4.3.1 Anchoring Bars in Tension

4.3.1.1 Deformed bars may be anchored in straight lengths (without end anchorages), provided the development length requirements are
satisfied. Plain bars should not be normally anchored through straight lengths alone and should be provided with hooks.

### 4.3.1.2 Bends and hooks

a) Bends - The anchorage value of a standard bend shall be taken as 4 times the diameter of the bar for each $45^{\circ}$ bend subject to a maximum of 16 times the diameter of the bar.
b) Hooks - The anchorage value of a standard U-type hook shall be equal to 16 times the diameter of the bar.

The anchorage values of standard hooks and bends for different bar diameters are given in Table 4.1.
4.3.2 Anchoring Bars in Compression - The anchorage length of straight bar in compression shall be equal to the development length of bars in compression as specified in 4.2.2. The projected length of hooks, bends and straight lengths beyond bends, if provided for a bar in compression, should be considered for development length (see Fig. 4.1).

TABLE 4.1 ANCHORAGE VALUE OF HOOKS AND BENDS

| Bar Diameter, mm | 6 | 8 | 10 | 12 | 16 | 18 | 20 | 22 | 25 | 28 | 32 | 36 |
| :-- | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Anchorage Value of Hook, cm | 9.6 | 12.8 | 16.0 | 19.2 | 25.6 | 28.8 | 32.0 | 35.2 | 40.0 | 44.8 | 51.2 | 57.6 |
| Anchorage Value of $90^{\circ}$ Bend, cm | 4.8 | 6.2 | 8.0 | 9.6 | 12.8 | 14.4 | 16.0 | 17.6 | 20.0 | 22.4 | 25.6 | 28.8 |


STANDARD HOOK

STANDARD 90 BEND

STANDARD HOOK AND BEND

| Type of Steel | Minimum Value of $k$ |
| :-- | :--: |
| Mild steel | 2 |
| Cold-worked steel | 4 |

Note 1 - Table is applicable to all grades of reinforcement bars.
Note 2 - Hooks and bends shall conform to the details given above.


NOTE - In compression hooks and bends are ineffective and cannot be used as anchorage.

Fig. 4.1 Development Length in Compression.
4.3.3 The development length values for fully stressed bars in tension as well as compression based on 4.2 .2 are'given in Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4.

Note - If the amount of steel provided at a design section is more than that required from design consideration, the development length given in Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 may be modified as:

$$
L_{\mathrm{de}}=\frac{A_{\mathrm{in}}}{\boldsymbol{A}_{\mathrm{in}}} \text { required }
$$

Unless otherwise specified, $L_{\text {de }}$ modified development length should be used in detailing reinforcement.
4.3.4 Mechanical Devices for Anchorage Any mechanical or other device capable of
developing the strength of the bar without damage to concrete may be used as anchorage with the approval of the Engineer-in-Charge.

### 4.3.5 Anchoring Shear Reinforcement

a) Inclined bars - The development length shall be as for bars in tension; this length shall be measured as under:

1) In tension zone, from the end of the sloping or inclined portion of the bar (see Fig. 4.2A), and

2) In the compression zone, from the mid depth of the beam (see Fig. 4.2B).
b) Stirrups and ties - Not withstanding, any of the provisions of this Handbook, in case of secondary reinforcement, such as stirrups and transverse ties, complete development length and anchorage shall be deemed to have been provided when the bar is bent through an angle of at least $90^{\circ}$ round a bar of at least its own diameter and is continued beyond the end of the curve for a length of at least eight diameters, or when the bar is
bent through an angle of $135^{\circ}$ and is continued beyond the end of the curve for a length of at least six bar diameters or when the bar is bent through an angle of $180^{\circ}$ and is continued beyond the end of the curve for a length of at least four bar diameters.
4.3.6 Special Members-Adequate end anchorage shall be provided for tension reinforcement in flexural members where reinforcement stress is not directly proportional to moment, such as sloped, stepped or tapered footings, brackets, deep beams and members in

TABLE 4.2 DEVELOPMENT LENGTH FOR FULLY STRESSED PLAIN BARS

$$
f_{s}=250 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2} \text { for bars up to } 20 \mathrm{~mm} \text { diameter }
$$

$=240 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ for bars over 20 mm diameter
(Tabulated values are in centimetres)

| Bar <br> Diameter | Tension Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  | Compression Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7) | (8) | (9) |
| 6 | 32.6 | 27.2 | 23.3 | 21.8 | 26.1 | 21.8 | 18.6 | 17.4 |
| 8 | 43.5 | 36.3 | 31.1 | 29.0 | 34.8 | 29.0 | 24.9 | 23.2 |
| 10 | 54.4 | 45.3 | 38.8 | 36.3 | 43.5 | 36.3 | 31.1 | 29.0 |
| 12 | 65.3 | 54.4 | 46.6 | 43.5 | 52.2 | 43.5 | 37.3 | 34.8 |
| 16 | 87.0 | 72.5 | 62.1 | 58.0 | 69.6 | 58.0 | 49.7 | 46.4 |
| 18 | 97.9 | 81.6 | 69.9 | 65.3 | 78.3 | 65.3 | 55.9 | 52.2 |
| 20 | 108.8 | 90.6 | 77.7 | 72.5 | 87.0 | 72.5 | 62.1 | 58.0 |
| 22 | 114.8 | 95.7 | 82.0 | 76.6 | 91.9 | 76.6 | 65.6 | 61.2 |
| 25 | 130.5 | 108.8 | 93.2 | 87.0 | 104.4 | 87.0 | 74.6 | 69.6 |
| 28 | 146.2 | 121.8 | 104.4 | 97.4 | 116.9 | 97.4 | 83.5 | 78.0 |
| 32 | 167.0 | 139.2 | 119.3 | 111.4 | 133.6 | 111.4 | 95.5 | 89.6 |
| 36 | 187.9 | 156.6 | 134.2 | 125.3 | 150.3 | 125.3 | 107.4 | 100.2 |

Note 1 - The development lengths given above are for a stress of $0.87 f_{s}$ in the bar.
Note 2 - It is important to note that hooks should normally be provided for plain bars in tension. Therefore, the straight length required in such cases is equal to the value taken from the table minus the anchorage value of hook.

TABLE 4.3 DEVELOPMENT LENGTH FOR FULLY STRESSED DEFORMED BARS

$$
f_{s}=415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}
$$

(Tabulated values are in centimetres)

| Bar <br> Diameter | Tension Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  | Compression Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7) | (8) | (9) |
| 6 | 33.8 | 28.2 | 24.2 | 22.6 | 27.1 | 22.6 | 19.3 | 18.1 |
| 8 | 45.1 | 37.6 | 32.2 | 30.1 | 36.1 | 30.1 | 25.8 | 24.1 |
| 10 | 56.4 | 47.0 | 40.3 | 37.6 | 45.1 | 37.6 | 32.2 | 30.1 |
| 12 | 67.7 | 56.4 | 48.4 | 45.1 | 54.2 | 45.1 | 38.7 | 36.1 |
| 16 | 90.3 | 75.2 | 64.5 | 60.2 | 72.2 | 60.2 | 51.6 | 48.1 |
| 18 | 101.5 | 84.6 | 72.5 | 67.7 | 81.2 | 67.7 | 58.0 | 54.2 |
| 20 | 112.8 | 94.0 | 80.6 | 75.2 | 90.3 | 75.2 | 64.5 | 60.2 |
| 22 | 124.1 | 103.4 | 88.7 | 82.7 | 99.3 | 82.7 | 70.9 | 66.2 |
| 25 | 141.0 | 117.5 | 100.7 | 94.0 | 112.8 | 94.0 | 80.6 | 75.2 |
| 28 | 158.0 | 131.6 | 112.8 | 105.3 | 126.4 | 105.3 | 90.3 | 84.2 |
| 32 | 180.5 | 150.4 | 128.9 | 120.3 | 144.4 | 120.3 | 103.2 | 96.3 |
| 36 | 203.1 | 169.3 | 145.0 | 135.4 | 162.5 | 135.4 | 116.1 | 108.3 |

Note - The development lengths given above are for a stress of $0.87 f_{s}$ in the bars.

TABLE 4.4 DEVELOPMENT LENGTH FOR FULLY STRESSED DEFORMED BARS

$$
f_{r}=500 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}
$$

(Tabulated values are in centimetres)

| Bar <br> Diameter | Tension Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  | Compression Bars for Grade of Concrete |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 | M15 | M20 | M25 | M30 |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) | (7) | (8) | (9) |
| mm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 6 | 40.8 | 34.0 | 29.1 | 27.2 | 32.6 | 27.2 | 23.3 | 21.8 |
| 8 | 54.4 | 45.3 | 38.8 | 36.3 | 43.5 | 36.3 | 31.1 | 29.0 |
| 10 | 68.0 | 56.6 | 48.5 | 45.3 | 54.4 | 45.3 | 38.8 | 36.3 |
| 12 | 81.6 | 68.0 | 58.3 | 54.4 | 65.3 | 54.4 | 46.6 | 43.5 |
| 16 | 108.8 | 90.6 | 77.7 | 72.5 | 87.0 | 72.5 | 62.1 | 58.0 |
| 18 | 122.3 | 102.0 | 87.4 | 81.6 | 97.9 | 81.6 | 69.9 | 65.3 |
| 20 | 135.9 | 113.3 | 97.1 | 90.6 | 108.8 | 90.6 | 77.7 | 72.5 |
| 22 | 149.5 | 124.6 | 106.8 | 99.7 | 119.6 | 99.7 | 85.4 | 79.8 |
| 25 | 169.9 | 141.6 | 121.4 | 113.3 | 135.9 | 113.3 | 97.1 | 90.6 |
| 28 | 190.3 | 158.6 | 135.9 | 126.9 | 152.3 | 126.9 | 108.8 | 101.5 |
| 32 | 217.5 | 181.3 | 155.4 | 145.0 | 174.0 | 145.0 | 124.3 | 116.0 |
| 36 | 244.7 | 203.9 | 174.8 | 163.1 | 195.8 | 163.1 | 139.8 | 130.5 |

Note - The development lengths given above are for a stress of $0.87 f_{r}$ in the bar.
4.2A IN TENSION ZONE
4.2B IN COMPRESSION ZONE

Fig. 4.2 Anchoring Inclined Bent-up Bars

which the tension reinforcement is not parallel to the compression face.
4.4 Reinforcement Splicing - Splicing is required to transfer force from one bar to another. Methods of splicing include lapping (see 4.4.2), welding (see Appendix A) and mechanical means (see.4.4.3).
4.4.1 Where splices are provided for continuity in the reinforcing bars (tension bars in beams), they shall be as far as possible away from the sections of maximum stress and be staggered. It is recommended that splice in flexural members should not be at sections where the bending moment is more tha $a 50$ percent of the moment of resistance of the section. Not more than half the bars shall be spliced at a section.

Where more than one half of the bars are spliced at a section or where splices are made at points of maximum stress, special precautions shall be taken, such as increasing the length of lap and/or using spirals or closely spaced stirrups around the length of the splice.

Note 1 - The stirrups provided should be able to resist a tension equal to the full tensile force in the lapped bars and should be provided in the outer one-third of the lap length at both ends with at least three stirrups on either side (see Fig. 4.3). In case of thick bars (say $\phi>28 \mathrm{~mm}$ ), lap splices should be completely enclosed by transverse reinforcement, for example, in the form of small compact stirrups or spirals [see Fig. 4.4 (A and B)].

Note 2-Careful detailing is necessary when reinforcements are to be spliced. Therefore location and details of splices should be determined at the design stage itself and indicated in the drawing. Preferably splicing details should not be left to be decided at the site of construction.

### 4.4.2 Lap Splices

a) Diameter of bars for lap splicing - Lap splices shall not be used for bars larger than 36 mm . For larger diameters, bars may be welded (see Appendix A).

In cases where welding is not practicable, lapping of bars larger than 36 mm may be permitted, in which case additional spirals should be provided around the lapped bars (see Fig. 4.4A).
b) Staggering of lap splices - Lap splices shall be considered as staggered if the centre-to-centre distance of the splices is not less than 1.3 times the lap length (see Fig. 4.5) calculated as given in (c) below. Bars could be lapped vertically one above the other or horizontally, depending upon the space requirement.
c) Lap length in tension - Lap length including anchorage value of hooks in flexural tension shall be $L_{d}$ or $30 \phi$ whichever is greater and for direct tension $2 L_{d}$ or $30 \phi$ whichever is greater. The straight length of the lap shall not be less than $15 \phi$ or 200 mm , whichever is greater (see Fig. 4.6). where

$$
L_{d}=\text { development length }
$$

Note - Splices in direct tension members shall be enclosed in spirals made of bars not less than 6 mm in diameter with pitch not more than 10 cm . Hooks/bends shall be provided at the end of bars in tension members (see Fig. 4.4 C ).
d) Lap length in compression - The lap length in compression shall be equal to the development length in compression calculated as in 4.2 .2 (see Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4), but not less than $24 \phi$.
e) Requirement of splice in a column-In columns where longitudinal bars are offset at a splice, the slope of the inclined portion of the bar with the axis of the column shall not exceed 1 in 6 , and the portions of the

Fig. 4.3 Transverse Reinforcement at a Splice


Fig. 4.4 Possible Forms of Transverse Reinforcement at a Splice

Fig. 4.5 Staggering of Lap Splices
bars above and below the offset shall be parallel to the axis of the column. Adequate horizontal support at the offset bends shall be treated as a matter of design, and shall be provided by metal ties, spirals, or parts of the floor construction. Metal ties or spirals so designed shall be placed near (not more than $8 \phi$ ) from the point of bend. The horizontal thrust to be resisted shall be assumed as $11 / 2$ times the horizontal component of the nominal force in the inclined


IN FLEXURAL TENSION WITHOUT HOOKS
.N FLEXURAL TENSION WITH HOOKS

IN COMPRESSION
4.6A BARS IN TENSION AND COMPRESSION

Fig. 4.6 Lap LENGili (Continued)


MORE THAN HALF STRESS END AND EDGE LAPS

HALF STRESS END LAP

HALF STRESS EDGE LAP
4.6B WEIDED WIRE FABRIC

Fig. 4.6 Lap LENGTH
portion of the bar (see Fig. 4.7). Offset bars shall be bent before they are placed in the forms. Where column faces are offset 75 mm or more, splices of vertical bars adjacent to the offset face shall be made by separate dowels overlapped at specified about.
Nute It is to be noted that in Fig. 4.7, additional stirrups will be required only near the bottom crank.
f) Bars of different diameters - When bars of two different diameters are to be spliced, the lap length shall be calculated on the basis of diameter of the smaller bar.
4.4.2.1 Lap splices in welded wire fabric
a) The fabric is supplied in long mats/rolls and it is rarely necessary to have a joint of the main wires. The rigidly connected crossmembers provide mechanical anchorage. Adequate lapping where necessary may be provided with a comparatively short lap when cross wires occur within the lap.
b) In structural slabs, laps in regions of maximum stress shall be avoided. Such splices, where used for either end or edge laps, shall be made so that the distance between


Fig. 4.7 Splice with Offset Cranked Bar in a Column

outermost cross wires is not less than the spacing of the wire parallel to the lap plus 100 mm (see Fig. 4.6).
c) In other cases for end laps, welded wire fabric shall be lapped not less than one mesh plus 50 mm , that is, the length of the lap shall be 50 mm greater than the spacing of wires parallel to the lap. For edge laps, a lap of 50 mm is sufficient (see Fig. 4.6).
d) These requirements for lapping should be covered by suitable notes in the general specifications. But whether specified by wordings or shown on plans, certain distinction should be made between 'edge laps' and 'end laps'.
e) The width of an edge lap shall be indicated as the centre-to-centre distance between the outside of longitudinal salvage wires of the overlapping sheets as illustrated in Fig. 4.6.
f) The length of an end lap shall be indicated as the top-to-top distance between the ends of the longitudinal wires of the overlapping sheets.
4.4.3 Welded Splices and Mechanical Connections - Where the strength of a welded splice or mechanical connection has been proved by tests to be at least as great as that of the parent bar, the design strength of such connections shall be taken as equal to 80 percent of the design strength of the bar for tension splice and 100 percent of the design strength for the compression splice. However, 100 percent of the design strength may be assumed in tension when the spliced area forms not more than 20 percent of the total area of steel at the section and the splices are staggered at least 600 mm centre-to-centre.

The choice of splicing method depends mainly on the cost, the grade of steel, the type of reinforcement, generally high bonding, the possibility of transferring compressive and/or tensile stresses and the available space in the section concerned. The designer shall specify the splicing method and the conditions under which it is to be carried out.

Mechanical coupling devices shall be arranged so that as small a number as possible affect a single section. They should, in addition, be placed outside the most bighly stressed sections.
4.4.3.1 Sleeve splicing - If correctly used, sleeve connections may transmit the total compressive or tensile stress. In general, the use of these sleeves is governed by various conditions laid down in the agreement for the method or, in the absence of recommendations, by preliminary testing.

During assembly, particular care shall be taken to ensure that the lengths introduced into the sleeve are sufficient.

These lengths should be marked before hand on the ends of the bars to be spliced except when a visual check on penetration is possible (for example, sleeve with a central sight hole):
a) Threaded couplers (see Fig. 4.8) - In order to prevent any decrease in the end sections of the bar as a result of threading (with V form or round threads), they can be:

Fig. 4.8 Threded Couplers (Threading Limited to The Ends of Bars)

1) upset;
2) for long units, fitted with larger section threaded ends by flash welding; or
3) fitted with a threaded sleeve by crimping.
Another solution consists of threading the ends but only taking into consideration the nominal section of the threaded end, that is, reducing the permissible stress in the reinforcement.

The ends of the sleeve shall be slightly reduced in section in order to prevent overstressing of the first few threads.

There are, at present, reinforcing bars with oblique, discontinuous, spiral ribs, allowing splicing with a special sleeve with internal threads.

This same process is used to splice prestressing bars, and in order to prevent confusion between reinforcing bars and prestressing steels, the direction of threading is reversed (see Fig. 4.9).

Fig. 4.9 Coupler for Reinforcing Bars ( $\phi 20$ to $\phi 28$ )

Two lock nuts, tightened on each side of the sleeve into which the reinforcing bars are introduced to the same depth, prevent any accidental unscrewing due to slack in the threads (splices not under tension). The nuts are tightened with a torque wrench.

This device is also used for splicing prefabricated elements.

These joints are generally 100 percent efficient under both tension and compression.

To decrease the in-situ operations, one of the ends is generally fitted with its sleeve in advance and the other bar to be joined with the sleeve should remain manoeuvrable until the splice has been made (see Fig. 4.10).
b) Coupling with a crimped sleeve -. Crimped sleeves constitute a method of splicing limited to relatively large diameter deformed reinforcing bars. It consists of the introduction of the bars to be spliced into a sleeve which is crimped by means of a hydraulic crimping tool onto the ribbed bars in order to fill the voids between them and the inner surface of the sleeve. The ribs on the bar penetrate into the relatively softer steel of the sleeve and the ribs work in shear.

During crimping the sleeve lengthens, and the other reinforcing bar to be spliced should be displaceable at this moment. The size of the crimping device requires a bar interspacing of at least 10 cm (see Fig. 4.11).

Splicing by crimping is also possible with reinforcing bars of differing diameter. The same method also enables threaded steel rods to be spliced to reinforcing bars,using high strength threaded bolts (see Fig. 4.12).
c) Coupling with injected sleeves - These couplings are a special case of sleeve splicing; the stresses are distributed by the shear strength of the product injected between the ends of the bars to be sleeve spliced:

1) With the 'Thermit' sleeve the space between the deformed bars and the sleeve, whose internal surface is also ribbed, is filled with a special molten metal. This molten metal is prepared in a crucible, which is in communication with the sleeve, by igniting a mixture consisting mainly of iron oxide and aluminium powder. The strength of the sleeve may be increased by using a larger sleeve diameter (see Fig. 4.13).

The sleeve is shorter but wider than that used in the crimping method. The bars are not in contact.

The splice may be made in any direction as long as space allows the crucible to be put into place.
2) Similar method is the injection of grout or an epoxy resin between the sleeve and the bars. The length of the sleeve is necessarily greater (see Fig. 4.14).
d) Butt splices - For this purpose open flanged sleeves made from steel strip can be used. They are tightened onto the bars by the introduction of a flat tapered wedge (see Fig. 4.15).
The end sections, in contact within the device, shall be perfectly at right angles to the axis of the spliced bars.

Another method involves the use of 4 small diameter ribbed bars which are tightened, using pliers, with 3 ring-clamps. The advantage of this method, in comparison to the previous one, is the fact that it allows a portion of the tensile stress to be taken up.

For bars with ribs in the form of a thread, a butt splice may be made with a sleeve, but with greater facility.

There are also sleeves consisting of a metallic cylinder, the internal diameter of which fits the bars to be spliced. This sleeve is fixed to one of the reinforcing bars by a few welding points: a hole at the centre of the sleeve enables one to check that there is contact between the bars. This

Fig. 4.10 Splicing with Threded Couplers


Fig. 4.11 Crimped Sleevs

Fig. 4.12 Sleeve Crimped on to a Threded Rod
economical method of splicing, which is easy to apply, can only transmit compressive stresses.

### 4.4.3.2 Main advantages and disadvantages of mechanical coupling

a) The use of mechanical couplers is frequently justified when space does not allow lapping, although crimping and tightening tools require accessibility which may reduce this advantage.
b) This splicing method often requires more careful cutting of the reinforcing bar, a check which is more difficult than in the case of lapping; it also requires the use of reinforcing bars of the same diameter, and mobility of one of the two bars to be spliced.
c) Good performance of the splice is not endangered by special atmospheric conditions as in welding.
d) The cost of equipment and its use limit this method to exceptional cases only.
Note - Some mechanical methods of splicing of reinforcement which are in vogue in this country make use of the following principles:
a) A special grade steel sleeve is swaged on to reinforcing bars to be joined with the help of a portable hydraulically operated bar grip press either at site or at stocking yard.
b) Two sleeves with threaded ends are drawn together by an interconnecting stud. These sleeves are then swayed on to the reinforcing bars either at site or at the stocking yard.
4.4.3.3 Welded splices (or joints) - The details of welding mild steel bars and cold-worked steel bars in accordance with IS : 2751-1979 'Code of practice for welding of mild steel plain and deformed bars for reinforced concrete construction (first revision)' and IS : 9417-1979 'Recommendations for welding cold-worked steel bars for reinforced concrete construction' respectively are covered in Appendix A.

### 4.5 Hooks and Bends

4.5.1 Hooks and bends, and other anchorage of reinforcement in reinforced concrete shall be of such form, dimensions and arrangement as will ensure their adequacy without over-stressing the concrete or steel.
4.5.2 Where normal hooks are used, they should be of U-type or L-type; but usually U-type is preferred for mild steel bars and L-type for deformed bars. If the radius of the bend or hooks conforms to that of the standard hooks or bends in longitudinal bars, the bearing stresses inside the bend in concrete need not be checked (see 4.5.2.1 and 4.5.2.2).