
1. deformed bar
2. prefabricated element
3. thermit sleeve
4. prefabricated element
5. insulation (asbestos)
6. ignition device
7. crucible
8. iron oxide-aluminium mixture
9. plugging disc
10. spliced length ( $\pm 60 \mathrm{~mm}$ )
11. thermit sleeve
12. bedding
13. asbestos

Fig. 4.13 Thermit Sleeve

Fig. 4.14 Splicing with Grouted Sleeves

Fig. 4.15 Coupling with Sleeve and Wedge
4.5.2.1 Bearing stresses at bends - The bearing stress in concrete for bends/hooks in stirrups and ties conforming to 4.3.5(b) need not be checked as there is a transverse bar at each bend. The bearing stress inside a bend in all other cases should preferably be calculated as given in the following formula (see Fig. 4.16). The most
dangerous situation is that of a bar, the layout of which is parallel to a surface or wall. Safety can be substantially increased by inclining the curve zone towards the mass of concrete wherever possible, a condition which frequently occures in anchorage. However, it may be noted that IS: 456-1978 also exempts check for bearing


# SECTION $\cdot \mathrm{XX}$ 


### 4.16B MINIMUM INTERNAL RADIUS OF BEND FOR EFFECTIVE ANCHORAGE OF FULLY STRESSED TENSION BARS

Fig. 4.16 Bearing Stress at Internal Bends

stress in concrete for standard hooks and bends described in Table 4.1.

Bearing stress, $\sigma=\frac{F_{\mathrm{bt}}}{r \phi}$
where
$F_{\mathrm{bt}}=$ tensile force due to design loads in a bar or group of bars ( N );
$r=$ interna! radius of the bend ( mm ); and
$\phi=$ size of the bar or, if in bundle, the size of bar of equivalent area ( mm ).
For limit state method of design, this stress shall not exceed $\frac{1.5 f_{\mathrm{ck}}}{1+\frac{2 \phi}{a}}$, where $f_{\mathrm{ck}}$ is the
characteristic strength of concrete and $a$, for a particular bar or group of bars in contact shall be taken as a centre-to-centre distance between bars or groups of bars perpendicular to the plane of the bend ( mm ); for a bar or group of bars
adjacent to the face of the member, $a$ shall be taken as the cover plus size of bar.

In other words, the minimum radius of the hend, $r$, should be such that

$$
r \geqslant 0.456 \phi\left(\frac{f_{2}}{f_{c k}}\right)\left(1+\frac{2 \phi}{a}\right)
$$

When the large steel stresses need to be developed is, "he bend, radial bearing stresses in the concrete may become excessive. The above equation controls the diameter of bend when there is a combination of high tensile stress in the bend, large bar diameter and low concrete strength. To simplify the application of the above formula minimum radius of bend is given in Table 4.5 for different grades of concrete and steel.
4.5.2.2 If a change in direction of tension or compression reinforcement induces a resultant force acting outward tending to split the concrete, such force should be taken up by additional links

TABLE 4.5 MINIMUM RADIUS OF BEND FOR BARS FULLY STRESSED AT BENDS IN cm
(Clause 4.5.2.1)

Note - The minimum radius is based on the full design stress in steel at the bend. In the absence of more precise calculations, it may be assumed that the tensile stress due to the anchorage at the source of a hook is equal to half the stress on the bar, by reasons of its mechanical strength.

or stirrups. Accordingly in structural components with curved or angled soffits, or those formed with bends or corners, it should be ensured that the radial tensile forces due to changes in the direction of reinforcement are resisted by additional links (see Fig. 4.17). Bent tension bar at a re-entrant angle should be avoided.
4.17A TENSION BAR IN A CURVED SOFFIT
1.17B COMPRESSION BAR IN HOGGING BEAM

Fig. 4.17 Radial Forces in Reinforcement
4.5.2.3 The minimum straight length of hook is four times the bar diameter. For small diameter bars this should be a minimum of 50 mm in order to facilitate holding the bar in place while forming the hook. The hooks when formed are quite large and while detailing it is important to ensure that they do not foul with other reinforcement, particularly where beams have more than one row of bars.
4.5.2.4 Reinforcing bars shall be so detailed that the hooks are not positioned in tensile zones of concrete as this may cause cracking. It is better to bend the bars so that the hooks and bars terminate in compression zones or so lengthen the bars to eliminate the need for hooks.

### 4.6 Curtailment of Tension Reinforcement in Flexural Members

4.6.1 For curtailment, reinforcement shall extend beyond the point at which it is no longer required to resist flexure for a distance equal to the effective depth of the member or 12 times the
bar diameter, whichever is greater, except at simple support or end of cantilever. Figures 4.18 to 4.21 illustrate the requirement at cut-off point and at supports in flexural members.

Note 1 - A point at which reinforcement is no longer required to resist flexure is where the resistance moment of the section, considering only the continuing bars, is equal to the design moment.

Note 2 - The points at which reinforcement can be curtailed is to be based on the bending moment envelope developed by the designer. It should be noted that the use of envelope helps in achieving better design. A typical bending moment envelope considering various loading conditions is given in Fig. 4.22.

Figure 4.23 gives a standard bending moment diagram (based on uniformly distributed load) to enable designers to choose locations for curtailment of reinforcement. In any case the curtailment of reinforcement should fulfill the requirements given in 4.6 .1 to 4.6 .4 .
4.6.2 Flexural reinforcement shall not, preferably, be terminated in a tension zone unless any one of the following conditions is satisfied (see Fig. 4.18):
a) The shear at the cut-off point does not exceed two-thirds that permitted, including the shear strength of web reinforcement provided.
b) Stirrup area in excess of that required for shear and torsion is provided along each terminated bar over a distance from the cutoff point equal to three-fourths the effective depth of the member. The excess stirrup area $\left(\mathrm{mm}^{2}\right)$ shall be not less than $0.4 \mathrm{~b} \mathrm{~s} / f_{s}$, where $b$ is the breadth of beam ( mm ), $s$ is the spacing ( mm ) and $f_{y}$ is the characteristic strength of reinforcement $\left(\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}\right)$. The resulting spacing shall not exceed $(d / 8) \beta_{h}$ where $\beta_{h}$ is the ratio of the area of bars cut-off to the total area of bars at the section and $d$ is the effective depth.
c) For 36 mm and smaller bars, the continuing bars provide double the area required for flexure at the cut-off point and the shear does not exceed three-fourths that permitted.

### 4.6.3 Positive Moment Reinforcement

a) At least one-third the maximum positive moment reinforcement in simple members and one-fourth the maximum positive moment reinforcement in continuous members shall extend along the same face of the member into the support, to a length equal to $L_{d} / 3$ (see Fig. 4.18), where $L_{d}$ is the development length based on fully stressed bars. This is required to provide for some shifting of the moment due to changes in the loading, settlement of supports, lateral loads and other causes.
b) When a flexural member is part of a primary lateral load resisting system, the positive reinforcement required to be extended into the support according to (a) shall be anchored to develop its design


*whichever is greater
A is the point at which certain amount of steel is no longer required
Any one of the conditions to be satisfied at the actual cut-off point, B:
i) For bars $<\phi 36, A_{1} \geqslant 2 A_{2}$ and $V_{s} \gg \frac{3}{4} V$
ii) Excess stirrup area (than that is required from design) in a distance of $\frac{3}{4} d$ from the cut-off point along the terminated bar $\Varangle \frac{0.4 b s}{f_{s}}$ with spacing $\gg \frac{d}{8}: B_{b}$
iii) $V_{s} \gg \frac{2}{3} V$

Notations: $A_{n}=$ positive moment steel as per . actual design
$L_{d}=$ development length based on fully stressed bars
$V_{s}=$ shear at the cut-off point
$V=$ shear strength of the section
$A_{1}=$ the critical area of steel required at the cut-off point
$A_{2}=$ area of continuing steel
$S=$ spacing of stirrups without cutting of steel
$b=$ breadth of member
$d=$ effective depth
$f_{s}=$ characteristic strength of reinforcement
$B_{b}=\frac{\text { area of bars cut-off }}{\text { Total area }}$
Fig. 4.18 Tensile Development Lengths for Positive Moment Steel in Slab/Beam with One Side Continuous and The Other Discontinuous

stress (fully developed stress) in tension at the face of the support (see Fig. 4.19). This anchorage is to assure ductility of response in the event of unexpected overstress such as from an earthquake. It is not sufficient to use more reinforcement at lower stresses. The full anchorage requirement does not apply to any excess reinforcement over and above that provided at the support.
c) At simple supports and at points of inflection, positive moment tension reinforcement shall be limited to a diameter such that $L_{d}$ does not exceed (see Fig. 4.18)

$$
\frac{M_{1}}{V}+L_{0}
$$

where
$M_{1}=$ moment of resistance of the section assuming all reinforcement at the section to be stressed to $f_{d}$;
$f_{d}=0.87 f_{y}$ in the case of limit state design;
$V=$ shear force at the section; and
$L_{o}=$ sum of the anchorage beyond the centre of the support and the equivalent anchorage value of any hook or mechanical anchorage at simple support; and at a point of inflection, $L_{0}$ is limited to the effective depth of the members or $12 \phi$, whichever is greater.
The value of $M_{1} / V$ in the above expression may be increased by 30 percent when the ends of the reinforcement are confined by a compressive reaction. In routine design calculations, it may be found that $\frac{M_{1}}{V}>L_{d}$, and hence no further check need be made. When the requirement

$$
L_{\mathrm{d}} \gg \frac{M_{1}}{V}+L_{0}
$$

is not satisfied, the designer should either reduce the diameter of bars, whereby $L_{d}$ is reduced, or
increase the area of positive reinforcement at the section considered, whereby $M_{1}$ is increased, or resort to both the steps.
4.6.4 Negative Moment Reinforcement - At least one-third of the total tension reinforcement provided for negative moment at the support shall extend beyond the point of inflection (PI) not less than the effective depth of the member or $12 \phi$ or one-sixteenth of the clear span, whichever is greater (see Fig. 4.20 and 4.21).
4.7 Spacing of Reinforcement - For the purpose of this clause, the diameter of a round bar shall be its nominal diameter, and in the case of bars which are not round or in the case of deformed bars or crimped bars, the diameter shall be taken as the diameter of a circle giving an equivalent effective area. Where spacing limitations and minimum concrete cover are based on bar diameter, a group of bars bundled in contact shall be treated as a single bar of diatneter derived from the total equivalent arca.

### 4.8 Bars Bundled in Contact

4.8.1 General - Bars in pairs, or in groups of 3 or 4 tied together and in contact side by side (boundled bars) may be ised in beams and columns. This has been the practice in USA for many years, and is now permitted in most countries including India.

As bundled bais provide more reinforcement in less space than do single bars, it is possible to reinforce a member more heavily and still get better compaction of concrete. Beam and column sizes can thus often be reduced with saving in cost.

Bundled bars shall not be used in members without stirrups. Bundled bars shall be tied together to ensure the bars remain together as a bundle. Bars larger than 36 mm diameter shall not be bundled except in columns.

Whenever bar spacing limitations, minimum cover, tie size and spacing are based on bar diameter, a group of bars bundled in contact shall
$L_{d}$ is development length based on fully stressed bars.
Fig. 4.19 Tensile Anchorage of Positive Moment Steel in Beams (When Beams are Part of a Lateral Load Resisting System)


Fig. 4.20 Tensile Development Length for Negative Moment at Continuous Edge

Fig. 4.21 Tensile Development Lengths for Positive Moment Steel at Discontinuous Ends
be treated as a single bar of diameter derived from the total equivalent area (see Table 4.6). However, the cover provided should be measured from the actual outside contour of the bundle.

Note 1 - Unless patented splices are used, the bundling of bars in columns is not recommended, as all joints have to be staggered. However, even when patented splices are used the necessary staggering of splices makes assembly difficult and prefabrication cumbursome.

Note 2 - It is recommended to limit the bundle only to two bars or three bars as four bars many times do not tie into a stable bundle.
4.8.2 Development Length $-L_{d}$ of each bar of bundled bars shall be that for the individual bar, increased by 10 percent for two bars in contact, 20 percent for three bars in contact and 33 percent for four bars in contact. The


Fig. 4.22 A Typical Bending Moment Envelope

TABLE 4.6 EQUIVALENT BAR SIZE FOR BARS IN GROUPS
(Clause 4.8.1)


FIG. 4.23 Standard Bending Moment Diagrams (Based on UDL)

anchorages of the bars of a bundle can only be straight anchorages.
4.8.3 Curtailment - Bars in a bundle shall terminate at different points spaced apart by not less than 40 times the bar diameter except for bundles stopping at a support (see Fig. 4.24).
4.8.4 Splicing - In case of bundled bars, lapped splices of bundled bars shall be made by splicing one bar at a time, such individual splices within a bundle shall be staggered. For bundles of 2, 3 or 4 bars, the staggering distance should be $1.2,1.3$ and 1.4 times the anchorage length of the individual bars respectively.
4.24B BUNDLE TERMINATED AT THEORETICAL CUT OFF POINT
STAGGERING ALL BARS
4.24C BUNDLE TERMINATED AT THEORETICAL CUT OFF POINT
LAST PAIR TERMINATED SIMULTANEOUSLY

Fig. 4.24 Curtailment of Bundled Bars

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 5 

Bar Bending Schedule
(Including Do's and Dont's in Detailing)

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 5 

## BAR BENDING SCHEDULE (INCLUDING DO'S AND DONT'S IN DETAILING)

5.1 Bar bending schedules are very important out of detailing and should give the following information:
a) Identification of the structural member(s),
b) Position of the bars in the structure,
c) The bar mark,
d) The diameter or size of bar,
e) The number of bars of one type in each structural member,
f) The total number of bars of each type,
g) The total straight length of the bar,
h) The shape and bending dimensions of the bar,
j) The details of bar chairs can also be included, and
k) Remarks, if any.

### 5.2 Schedules

5.2.1 The reinforcement of slabs, beams and other parts of structures may be effectively shown on working drawings in a tabular form, known as a schedule. The schedule is a compact summary of the dimensions of the concerned structural part, all the bars complete with the number of pieces, shape and size, lengths and bending details from which fabrication details may be easily worked out. The dimensioning procedure for different bar shapes as shown in Tables 5.1 to 5.7 may be followed.

Note - The value of length is the length of straight bar from which the actual shape will be bent or for a straight bar, the length of that bar. This length will be equal to the sum of individual overall lengths of the straight portions of each shape
5.2.2 A schedule shall be supplemented with diagrams and sketches wherever necessary. Where bars of different dimensions are used, the exact arrangement of the reinforcement shall be shown by means of clear diagrams. No abbreviation or symbol shall be used in a schedule without proper explanation.
5.2.3 For small structures detailed on a single sheet, the schedule may be placed in the upper left corner of the drawing. For larger structures requiring more than one drawing, the complete schedule may appear on the last sheet of the details, or if the size of the strucutre warrants,
separate schedules may be prepared for each unit (foundation, abutements, piers, etc) on the drawing covering that specific unit of the structure.
5.3 Beams, Girders and Joists - Details of reinforcement for beams, girders and joists are usually shown in schedules. The schedules should show the number, mark and location of member; number, size, position and length of straight bars; number, size, position, bending details and total length of bent bars and stirrups; size, shape and spacing of bar supports; and any other special information necessary for proper fabrication and placement of the reinforcement (see Table 5.8). Care shall be taken not to omit any controlling dimension such as overall length of the bar, height of the bent bar and location of bar with respect to supporting members where the bar is not placed symmetrically. The schedule should also include special notes on bending and any special information, such as the requirements of laps, two layers of steel, etc.
5.4 Slabs - The reinforcement for slabs is generally indicated on the plan, with details for the various types of bent bars shown in a schedule (see Table 5.8). The schedule shall be similar to that for bars in beams, except that the number of bars may also be obtained from the plan. Panels exactly alike shall be given an identifying mark or so specified in the schedule.
5.4.1 In skewed panels, bars shall be fanned to maintain given spacing in the mid span. Additional bars for reinforcing the openings shall be as shown on plan (see Section 9).
5.4.2 In case of welded wire fabric sheet in slab panels, a schedule may also be included in the structural drawing indicating the mesh sizes (length and width) and fitting details for welded wire fabric sheets for different slab panels. A typical schedule is given in Table 5.9.
5.5 Walls - The reinforcement for walls shall be indicated on the plan, elevation and section with the details for various types of bent bars shown in schedule in a manner similar to that for beams and slabs.
5.6 Columns - The reinforcement for columns may be shown in a column schedule. Piles and pile caps should be treated as separate units and separate details or schedule or both may be provided. The main schedule may be supplemented with a smaller schedule for ties and

# TABLE 5.1 MEASUREMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS OF BARS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE 

(Clause 5.2.1)

Noit 1 Where a hook/bend is to be formed at right angles to the plane in which the bending sketch of the bar is drawn in the schedule, the hook/bend shall be indicated as below and marked either 'hook/bend up' or 'hook/bend down': Bend Hook up $\qquad$ Bend/Hook down $\qquad$
Noit 2 $H$ and $B$ refer to hook allowance anu bend allowance respectively.

|  | TABLE 5.2 MEASUREMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS OF BARS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE <br> (Clause 5.2.1) |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| $\begin{aligned} & \text { Ref } \\ & \text { No. } \end{aligned}$ | Method of Measurement of Bending Dimensions | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Approx Total } \\ & \text { Length of Bar ( } L \text { ) } \\ & \text { Measured Along } \\ & \text { Centre Line } \end{aligned}$ | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Sketch and } \\ & \text { Dimensions } \\ & \text { to be Given } \\ & \text { in Schedule } \end{aligned}$ |

Noit: 1 -Where a hook/bend is to be formed at right angles to the plane in which the bending sketch of the bar is draw. in the schedule, the hook/bend shall be indicated as below and marked either 'hook/bend up' or 'hook/bend dowr Bend Hook up Bend/Hook down

Noit: 2 - The internal radius $R$ shall be specified if it is other than standard hook and bend.
Noit: 3 - $H$ and $B$ refer to hook allowance and bend allowance respectively.

# TABLE 5.3 MEASUREMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS OF BARS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE 

(Clause 5.2.1)

Nitit 1 -Where a hook: bend is to be formed at right angles to the plane in which the bending sketch of the bar is drawn in the schedule. the hook: bend shall be indicated as below and marked either 'hook/bend up' or 'hook/bend down': Bend Hook up Bend. Hook down

Nitit 2 The internal radius $R$ shall be specified if it is other than standard hook and bend.
Nitit 3 II. $B$ and $d$ refer to hok allowance. bend allowance and nominal size of bar respectively.

# TABLE 5.4 MEASUREMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS OF BARS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE 

(Clause 5.2.1)

| Ref <br> No. | Method of Measurement of Bending Dimensions | Approx Total Length of Bar ( $L$ ) Measured Along Centre Line | Sketch and Dimensions to be Given in Schedule |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |

Note 1 Where a hook bend is to be formed at right angles to the plane in which the bending sketch of bar is drawn in the schedule, the hook bend shall be indicated as below and marked either 'hook/bend up' or 'hook/bend down': Bend Hook up Bend Hook down
Note 2 The internal radius $R$ shall be specified if it is other than standard hook and bend.
Note 3 If and $B$ refer to hook allowance and bend allowance respectively.
Nin 4 Dimensions $X$ and $Y$ should be practical dimensions to enable the angle of the bend to be determined.

| Ref No. | Method of Measurement of Bending Dimensions | Approx. Total Length of Bar (L) Measured Along Centre Line | Sketch and Dimensions to be Given in Schedule |
|--------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| A |  | $A + E + 2S + 2H + d$$ | (See Notes 1 and 2) |
| B |  | $A + E + 3S + 2d + B + H$$ | (See Notes 1 and 2) |
| C |  | $A + E + C + 2H - \sqrt{C^2 - D^2} - D$$ | (See Note 1) |
| D |  | $E + 2(A - D + C + H)$$ | (See Note 1) |
| E |  | $1 + 2C + 2H$$ | (See Note 1) |
| F |  | $2C + 2E + 1 + 2H$$ | (See Note 1) |

**Table 5.5: Measurement of Bending Dimensions of Bars for Reinforced Concrete**

(Clause 5.2.1)

**Note 1:** The internal radius $R$ shall be specified if it is other than standard hook and bend.

**Note 2:** $H$, $H$ and $d$ refer to hook allowance, bend allowance, and a nominal size of bar respectivele

# TABLE 5.6 MEASURFMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS FOR BINDERS, STIRRUPS, LINKS AND THE LIKE FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE 

(Clause 5.2.1)

| $\begin{gathered} \text { Ref } \\ \text { No. } \end{gathered}$ | Method of Measurement of Bending Dimensions | Appron Total Length of Bar ( $L$ ) Measured Along Centre I ine | Sketch and Dimensions to be Given in Schedule |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |

Noit 1 The internal radius $R$ of the corners of binders, stirrups, etc, shall be specified if it is other than standard hons. and bend.
Noit 2 If the form of the bar is such that there may be doubt as to which is the inside of the bar, arrows should be shown on the bending schedule and the dimension stated with the suffix OD or ID (outside or inside dimension).
Noit 3 B and $d$ refer to bend allowance and nominal size of bar respectively.

TABLE 5.7 MEASUREMENT OF BENDING DIMENSIONS FOR BINDERS, STIRRUPS, LINKS AND THE LIKE FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE
(Clause 5.2.1)

Note - $d$ refers to nominal size of bar.
bent bars, diagrams showing the arrangement and bending of the ties, and any special feature of the construction pertinent to the fabrication and placing of the column reinforcement. In case of rectangular column the reinforcement details may be indicated with reference to framing plan. In case of square columns designed for bending and axial load with unequal reinforcement in two directions, detailed plan should be given showing the reinforcement, the beams framing into the column, and other salient reference lines so that the bars are placed in correct places.

In addition to showing size and normal spacing of column ties, the designer shall also show any additional ties required for special conditions such as splices, offset bends, etc.
5.7 Dowels and Bar Supports - Dowels and bar supports, spacer bars, bar chairs, etc, should be specifically listed on the structural drawing and should be scheduled in that portion of the structure in which they are first required so that they can be delivered with the reinforcement and are available for placement at proper time. I sotings dowels shall be scheduled with footings rather than in column schedules.
5.8 Other Structures - On some types of structures, such as bridges, tanks, sewers and conduits, and certain components of buildings such as stairs, special procedure may be used and adopted to the particular structure. The principal object is to show the reinforcement in a simple, clear and easy manner. This may be accomplished

TABLE 5.8 TYPICAL BAR BENDING SCHEDULE FOR BEAMS, SLABS AND COLUMNS
(Clause 5.3)

| MARK AND <br> LOCATION OF <br> MEMBER <br> (see Key Plan) <br> (1) | DRAWING <br> Refer- <br> ENCE <br> (2) | No. of <br> MEMBER <br> (3) | $\begin{gathered} \text { Bar } \\ \text { Type } \\ (4) \end{gathered}$ | $\begin{gathered} \text { Bar } \\ \text { No. } \\ \text { (5) } \end{gathered}$ | $\begin{gathered} \text { Bar } \\ \text { Size } \\ \text { (6) } \end{gathered}$ | $\begin{gathered} \text { Cutting } \\ \text { Bar } \\ \text { Length } \\ \text { (7) } \end{gathered}$ | No. of <br> BARS PER <br> MEMBER <br> (8) | $\begin{gathered} \text { Total } \\ \text { No. of } \\ \text { BARS } \\ \text { (9) } \end{gathered}$ | $\begin{gathered} \text { Total } \\ \text { Weight } \\ \text { of BARS } \\ \text { (10) } \end{gathered}$ | Detailed <br> (DIMENSIONED) <br> Sketch <br> (11) | Remarks <br> (12) |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| $\begin{aligned} & B_{\mathrm{m}} 6 \text { Floor } 1 \\ & B_{\mathrm{m}} 7 \\ & B_{\mathrm{m}} 8 \\ & \text { and } \\ & B_{\mathrm{m}} 10 \end{aligned}$ | Drg No. <br> Stc... | 4 | B. 8 | 75 | 16 | 200 cm | 8 | 32 |  |  |  |

TABLE 5.9 TYPICAL SCHEDULE FOR SLAB USING WELDED WIRE FABRIC AS REINFORCEMENT
(Clause 5.4.2)

| MARK AND <br> LOCATION <br> OF <br> MEMBER | DRAWING <br> REFERENCE <br> (1) | No. of <br> MEM- <br> BERS/ <br> PANELS | Fabric <br> Desig- <br> NATION <br> No. AS <br> PER IS: <br> (4) | Fabric <br> REFER- <br> ENCE <br> (5) | N $\begin{gathered} \text { N } \\ \text { E } \\ \text { E } \\ \text { N } \\ \text { N } \end{gathered}$ | Total <br> No. <br> (8) | Width <br> (9) | Length <br> (10) | Cutting <br> (11) | Remarks <br> (11) |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |

by a small detailed sketch of each bar or type of bar with a table of dimensions.
5.9 Schedule Layout - A typical form of schedule for beams, slabs and columns is shown in Table 5.8 and Table 5.9 shows another typical form schedule for slab using welded wire fabric as reinforcement. Also an example of typical bar bending schedule is given in Table 5.10.
5.9.1 Internatioanal Standard 'ISO : 4066 1977 'Building and civil engineering drawingsBar scheduling' establishes a system of scheduling of reinforcing bars comprising the following aspects:
a) the method of indicating dimensions;
b) a code system of bar shapes;
c) a list of preferred shapes; and
d) the bar schedule form.

This standard is reproduced in Appendix B as a supplement to the information contained in this Section.

### 5.10 Do's and Dont's for Detailing

### 5.10.1 Do's-General

a) Prepare drawings properly and accurately. If possible label each bar and show its shape for clarity.
b) Prepare bar-bending schedule, if necessary.
c) Indicate proper cover to reinforcement.
d) Decide location of openings hole and supply adequate details for reinforcement around openings.
e) Commonly available size of bars and spirals shall be used for reinforcement. For a single structural member the number of different sizes of reinforcement bar should be minimum.
f) The grade of reinforcement bars shall be clearly mentioned in the structural drawing.
g) For mild steel plain bars U-type hooks and for deformed bars L-type hooks may be adopted. Deformed bars need not have hook at their ends.
h) Bars shall have smooth curved edges at the point of bend.
j) In case of bundled bars, lapped splice of bundled bars shall be made by splicing one bar at a time; such individual splices within a bundle shall be staggered.
k) When reinforcement is left exposed for future construction, it should be adequately protected from corrosion and weathering action.
m) Congestion of steel should be avoided at points where members intersect and make
certain that all reinforcement shown can be properly placed.
n) Make sure that hooked and bent bars can be placed and have adequate concrete protection.
p) Make sure that bent bars are not so large and unwieldly that they cannot be transported.
q) Indicate all expansion, contraction and construction joints on framing plans and provide details for such joints.
r) Where a section is not on the same sheet as the plan from which it is taken, use a clearly defined system of cross-reference for locations of sections and details.
s) Show enlarged details at corners, intersections of walls, beam and column joint, and at similar special situations.

### 5.10.2 Do's-Beams and Slabs

a) Where splices are provided in reinforcing bars, they shall be, as far as possible. away from the sections of maximum stress and shall be staggered.
b) Where the depth of a beam exceeds 750 mm in case of beams without torsion and 450 mm with torsion, side face reinforcement shall be provided.
c) In two-way slab, reinforcement parallel to the short span of the slab shall be placed in the bottom layer at mid-span and in the top layer at support.
d) All spacing shall be centre-to-centre spacing of bars.
e) Deflection in slabs beams may be reduced by providing compression reinforcement.
f) Only closed stirrups shall be used for transverse reinforcement for members subject to torsion and for members likely to be subjected to reversal of stress.
g) At beam-column intersections ensure that the main beam bars avoid the main column bars.
h) At beam-beam intersections, main reinforcement may be so arranged that layers in mutually perpendicular beams are at different levels.
j) To accommodate bottom bars, it is good practice to make secondary beams shallower than main beams, at least by 50 mm .
k) If it is required the beam cages may be preassembled with splice bars.

### 5.10.3 Do's-Columns

a) A reinforced column shall have at least six bars of longitudinal reinforcement for using in transverse helical reinforcement.

SP : 34(S&T)-1987

TABLE 5.10 TYPICAL EXAMPLE OF A BAR BENDING SCHEDULE (Clause 5.9)

| MEMBER | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|-------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| SLAB A | 1 | 12 | 8 | 2.90 | 34.80 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |

b) Spacing of longitudinal bars in column shall be along the periphery of the column, as far as practicable.
c) Column bars of diameters larger than 36 mm in compression can be spliced with dowels at the footing with bars of smaller sizes and of necessary area.
d) A dowel shall extend into a column, a distance equal to the development length of the column bar and into footing a distance equal to development length of the dowel.
e) Keep outer dimensions of column constant, as far as possible, for re-use of forms.
f) Preferably avoid use of two grades of vertical bars in the same element.

### 5.10.4 Donis-General

a) Reinforcement shall not extend across an expansion joint and the break between the sections shall be complete.
b) Flexural reinforcement, preferably, shall not be terminated in a tension zone. If such case
is essential, the condition as given in Section 4 shall be satisfied.
c) Lap splices shall not be used for bars larger than 36 mm diameter except where welded.
d) Bars larger than 36 mm diameter shall not be bundled.
e) Where dowels are provided their diameter shall not exceed the diameter of the column bars by more than 3 mm .
f) Where bent bars are provided, their contribution towards shear resistance shall not be more than half that of the total shear reinforcement.
g) Different types of reinforcing bars such as deformed bars and plain bars and various grades like $415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ and $215 \mathrm{~N} \mathrm{~mm}^{2}$ should not be used side by side as this practice would lead to confusion at site. However, secondary reinforcement such as links ties and strirrups may be of mild steel throughout, even though the main steel may be of high strength deformed bars.
h) Under no circumstances should the bending of bars at welds be permitted.

# SECTION 6 

Foundations

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 6 

## FOUNDATIONS

6.1 Types of Foundations - The following are types of reinforced concrete foundations, the particular type being chosen depending on the magnitude and disposition of the structural loads, and the bearing capacity of the ground.
a) Individual Column Footing - Generally square in plan but some times rectangular or circular.
b) Combined Footing - Combined footing is a common footing to two or more columns in a line. The placing of reinforcement depends on the shape of the bending moment and shear force diagrams considering the soil pressure and the column loads on the footing.
c) Strip Footings - Under columns or walls.
d) Raft Foundation - Covering the whole plan area of structure, detailing being similar to 2 -way reinforced solid floor slabs or flat slabs.
e) Pile Foundations - This includes detailing of pile cap and pile portion.
6.2 Cover - The minimum thickness of cover to main reinforcement shall not be less than 50 mm for surfaces in contact with earth face and not less than 40 mm for external exposed face. However, where the concrete is in direct contact with the soil, for example, when a levelling course of lean concrete is not used at the bottom of footing, it is usual to specify a cover of 75 mm . This allows for the uneven surface of the excavation. In case of raft foundation, whether resting directly on soil or on lean concrete, the cover for the reinforcement shall not be less than 75 mm .
6.3 Minimum Reinforcement and Bar Diameter - The minimum reinforcement according to slab and beam elements as appropriate should be followed, unless otherwise specified. The diameter of main reinforcing bars should be not less than 10 mm .
6.4 Detailing Methods - Foundations should normally be detailed diagrammatically in plan and elevation.
6.4.1 In case of plan, show diagrammatically the location of foundation reinforcement (similar to slabs) as well as starter bars and stirrups (as for columns). It is preferable for column and wall dowels (starter bars), and the foundation reinforcement to be shown on the same drawing.
6.4.2 In case of elevation, show diagrammatically the location of reinforcement as for beams.

In case of pile foundation, detailing of pile is similar to that of columns and detailing of the pile cap supporting on piles is similar to that of footing.

An indication of the type of soil and its assumed bearing capacity may be specified in the drawing.
6.5 Individual Footings - Individual footings (see Fig. 6.1) are generally square and support a central column. Rectangular footings can be used when the space is restricted in one direction. Individual footings of circular and other shapes can also be used. Figure 6.1 gives typical details of a column footing.
6.5.1 Reinforcement Requirements - Total tensile reinforcement shall be distributed across the corresponding resisting section as given below:
a) In one-way reinforced footing, the reinforcement shall be distributed uniformly across the full width of the footing.
b) In two-way reinforced square footing, the reinforcement extending in each direction shall be distributed uniformly across the full width of the footing.
c) In two-way reinforced rectangular footing, the reinforcement in the long direction shall be distributed uniformly across the full width of the footing. For reinforcement in the short direction, a central band equal to the width of the footing shall be marked along the length of the footing and portion of the reinforcement determined in accordance with the equation given below shall be uniformly distributed across the central band:

$$
\frac{\text { Reinforcement in central band }}{\text { Total reinforcement in short direction }}=\frac{2}{(y / x)+1}
$$

where $y$ is the long side and $x$ is the short side of the footing.

The remainder of the reinforcement shall be uniformly distributed in the outer portions of the footing.

Figure 6.2 illustrates placing of transverse reinforcement for a rectangular footing.


*Use of starter bars or continuous bars depends upon the distance between the first floor level and the level of foundation. Note 1 - Provide standard $90^{\circ}$ bend, if the bar is required to be bent upwards to get the required development length. Note 2 - In case a pedestal is provided, the development length is to be considered from the top level of pedestal.

Fig. 6.1 Typical Details of a Column Footing


Note - Provide standard $90^{\circ}$ bend, if the bar is required to be bent upwards to get required development length.
Fig. 6.2 Placing of Transverse Reinforcement for a Rectangular Footing
6.5.1.1 Vertical reinforcement or dowels Extended vertical reinforcement or dowels of at least 0.5 percent of the cross-sectional area of the supported column or pedestal with a minimum of 4 bars of 12 mm diameter shall be provided. Where dowels are used, their diameter shall not exceed the diameter of column bars by more than 3 mm .

Column bars of diameter larger than 36 mm in compression can be dowelled at the footings with bars of smaller size of the necessary area. The dowel shall extend into the column a distance equal to the development length of the column bar, and into the footing a distance equal to the development length of the dowel. The development length shall be calculated in accordance with 4.4.2.

For method of detailing see Fig. 6.1.
Note - Where the depth of the footing or footing and pedestal combined is less than the minimum development length in compression required for dowels (starter bars) of a certain size, the size of dowels (starter bars) may be suitably decreased and the number of dowels increased to satisfy the required area and development length.
6.5.1.2 To achieve economy, the footings are sloped or stepped towards the edge satisfying the requirements for bending and punching shear. In sloped footing, the slope is generally restricted such that top formwork is not called for in
construction. The thickness at the edges shall not be less than 15 cm for footings on soils, nor less than 30 cm above tops of piles in case of footing on piles.

### 6.6 Combined Footings

6.6.1 Combined footings become necessary where the external columns of the structure are close to the boundry of an existing structure and also where the footings of individual columns overlap one another. Such foundations (supporting more than one column/pedestal or a continuous wall) shall be proportioned to resist the design loads and individual reactions, in accordance with appropriate design requirements. The detailing requirements as specified in Section 4 for slabs and beams shall be followed as appropriate.
6.6.2 Detailing - For combined footing, detailing of longitudinal and transverse bars is similar to that of beams.
6.6.2.1 Column on edges of footing - To prevent shear failure along the inclined plane (corbel type of failure) in footing, where a column is located on the edge, it is advisable to provide horizontal U-type bars around the vertical starter bars. These bars shall be designed for every such column (see Fig. 6.3).


SECTION

Fig. 6.3 Columis on Edge of a Footing
6.6.2.2 Figure 6.4 (A, B and C) shows typical arrangement of bars in combined footings.
6.7 Continuous Footing Under Walls - In continuous wall foundations, transverse reinforcement should be provided when the projection of the footing beyond the wall exceeds the thickness of the footing (see Fig. 6.5). It is also recommended that longitudinal reinforcement be provided wherever an abrupt change in the magnitude of the load or variation in ground support or local loose pockets may occur along the footing.
6.8 Raft Foundations - A raft is a foundation unit continuous in two directions, covering an area equal to or greater than the base area of the building. If the raft consists of several parts with varying loads and heights, it is advisable to design the raft with expansion joints between these parts. Joints shall also be provided wherever there is a change in the direction of the raft and should be detailed on the drawing. The detailing
requirements as specified in Section 4 for beams and columns may be followed as appropriate.
6.8.1 Minimum reinforcement in either direction shall not be less than 0.15 percent of the gross sectional area for mild steel reinforcement and 0.12 percent in case of high strength deformed bars.
6.8.2 Detailing - For raft foundation, detail both the longitudinal and transverse bars generally in accordance with the rules for slabs and beams except cover and bar supports. While detailing reinforcement in raft foundation, construction method and sequence of construction are to be specified which should include the following:
a) Position of construction joints.
b) Position of movement joints, and
c) Position of water bar joints.

The location of lap splices in raft should be detailed with care as the direction of bending will differ from suspended members.
6.8.3 Placing of Bar Supports - Where top reinforcement is required, consideration should be given to the method of supporting this with chairs and edge U-bars. This must be carried out in accordance with the specification for the job and should take into account construction sequence, weight of top steel and depth of foundation. The suggested spacing of supports is 30 times the diameter of supporting bars using chairs having diameter of at least 12 mm . The diameter of chairs should be such that they do not bend or buckle under the weight of reinforcement and other incidental loads during construction.
6.8.4 Ducts and Trenches - Where ducts and trenches occur in rafts, special attention should be given to detailing continuity of top reinforcement, specially where moment transfer is required (see Fig. 6.6).

### 6.9 Pile Foundation

### 6.9.1 Driven Precast Concrete Pile

a) The longitudinal reinforcement shall be provided in precast reinforced concrete piles for the entire length. All the main longitudinal bars shall be of the same length with lap welded at joints and should fit tightly into the pile shoe if there is one. Shorter rods to resist local bending moments may be added but the same should be carefully detailed to avoid any sudden discontinuity of the steel which may lead to cracks during heavy driving. The area of main longitudinal reinforcement shall not be less than the following percentages of the cross-sectional area of the piles:

1) For piles with length less than 30 times the least width-1.25 percent.


SECTION-AA
SECTION-BB
6.4A COMBINED COIUMN FOOTING

6.4B STRIP FOOTING UNDER COLUMNS

Fig. 6.4 Typical Details of Combined Footing (Continued)


PLAN-TOP STEEL
6.4C TAPERED COMBINED FOOTING STIRUPPS(NOT SHOWN)

Fig. 6.4 Typical Details of Combined Footings


Fig. 6.5 Strip F̄ooting Under Walls
2) For piles with length 30 to 40 times the least width-1.5 percent.
3) For piles with length "greater than 40 times the least width-2 percent.
b) The lateral reinforcement is of particular importance in resisting the driving stresses induced in the piles and should be in the form of hoops or links and of diameter not less than 6 mm . The volume of lateral reinforcement shall not be less than the following (see Fig. 6.7):

1) At each end of the pile for a distance of about 3 times the least width-not less than 0.6 percent of the gross volume of that part of the pile; and
2) In the body of the pile-not less than 0.2 percent of the gross volume of pile.
The spacing shall be such as to permit free flow of concrete around it. The transition between the close spacing of lateral reinforcement near the ends and the maximum spacing shall be gradually over a length of 3 times the least width of the pile.

The cover of concrete over all the reinforcement including ties should not be less than 40 mm . But where the piles are exposed to sea water or water having other corrosive content, the cover should be nowhere less than 50 mm .

Piles should be provided with flat or pointed co-axial shoes if they are driven into or through ground, such as rock, coarse gravel, clay with cobbles and other soils liable to damage the concrete at the tip of the pile. The shoe may be of steel or cast iron. Shapes and details of shoes depend on the nature of ground in which the pile is driven. In uniform clay or sand the shoe may be omitted.

Where jetting is necessary for concrete piles, a jet tube may be cast into the pile, the tube being connected to the pile shoe which is provided with jet holes. Generally, a central jet is inadvisable, as it is liable to become choked. At least two jet holes will be necessary on opposite sides of the shoe, four holes give best results. Alternatively, two or more jet pipes may be attached to the sides of the pile.
6.9.1.1 Reinforcement requirement - A pile shall be reinforced in the same way as the column, with the main bars on the periphery and secondary bars (binders or links) around main bars. In addition the main bars shall be bent inwards at the lower end and welded to the shoe made of chilled cast iron or steel.
6.9.1.2 Spacer bars - To ensure the rigidity, pile spacer bars shall be used as shown in Fig. 6.8. The spacer bars or forks can be of cast iron, pressed steel or a length of steel pipe with slotted ends to fit the main reinforcing bars. They can be detailed on the drawing, at 1.5 m centres along the full length of the pile. The fork may be placed diagonally at each position across the section as shown in Fig. 6.8.

Fig. 6.6 Typical Details Around a Trench in Raft Foundation


Fig. 6.7 Minimum Steel Requirements of PRECAST CONCRETE PILE

# SECTION A A 

TOE FOR PILE
(SUITABLE FOR GRAVEL AND SAND)
Fig. 6.8 Typical Details of a Precast concrete pile

### 6.9.2 Cast-in-situ Piles or Bored Piles

6.9.2.1 Reinforcement requirement - The design of the reinforcing cage vary depending upon the driving and installation conditions, the nature of the subsoil and the nature of load to be transmitted by the shaft, that is, axial or otherwise. The minimum area of longitudinal reinforcement (mild steel or deformed bars) within the pile shaft shall be 0.4 percent of the sectional area calculated on the basis of outside area of casing of the shaft.

The curtailment of reinforcement along the depth of the pile, in general, depends on the type of loading and subsoil strata. In case of piles subject to compressive load only, the designed quantity of reinforcement may be curtailed at appropriate level according to the design requirements. For piles subjected to uplift load, lateral load and moments, separately or with compressive loads, it may be necessary to provide reinforcement for the full depth-of pile. In soft clays or loose sands, or where there is likelihood of danger to green concrete due to driving of adjacent piles, the reinforcement should be provided up to the full pile depth with lap welds at joints regardless of whether or not it is required from uplift and lateral load considerations. However, in all cases, the minimum reinforcement should be provided in the full length of the pile.

Piles shall always be reinforced with a minimum amount of reinforcement as dowels, keeping the minimum bond length into the pile shaft and with adequate projection into the pile cap.

Clear cover to all main reinforcement in pile shaft shall be not less than 50 mm . The laterals of a reinforcing cage may be in the form of links or spirals. The diameter and spacing of the same is chosen to impart adequate rigidity to the reinforcing cage during its handling and installations. The minimum diameter of the links or spirals shall be 6 mm and the spacing of the links or spirals shall be not less than 150 mm .
6.9.3 Under-reamed Piles - The minimum area of longitudinal reinforcement in stem should be 0.4 percent. Reinforcement is to be provided in full length. Transverse reinforcement shall not be less than 6 mm diameter at a spacing of not more than the stem diameter or 300 mm , whichever is less. In under-reamed compaction piles, a minimum number of four $12-\mathrm{mm}$ diameter bars shall be provided. For piles of lengths exceeding 5 m and of 375 mm diameter, a minimum number of six $12-\mathrm{mm}$ bars shall be provided. For piles exceeding 400 mm diameter, a minimum number of six $12-\mathrm{mm}$ bars shall be provided. The circular stirrups for piles of lengths exceeding 5 m and diameter exceeding 375 mm shall be minimum $8-\mathrm{mm}$ diameter bars.

The minimum clear cover over the longitudinal reinforcement shall be 40 mm . In aggressive
environment of sulphates, etc, it may be increased to 75 mm .

Figure 6.9 gives typical details of a bored cast-in-situ under-reamed pile foundation.

3A SECTION OF SINGLE 3B SECTION OF MULTI UNDER-REAMED PILE UNDER-REAMED PILE.

$$
\phi_{1}=45^{\circ} \text { (approx), } \phi_{2}=30^{\circ}-45^{\circ} \text { (Approx) }
$$

$D_{n}=$ normally $2.5 D$
Fig. 6.9 Typical Details of Bored Cast in-situ Under-Reamed Pile Foundation

### 6.9.4 Pile Caps

6.9.4.1 The pile cap usually supports column and this is positioned at the centre of gravity of the pile group, so the pile cap incorporates column dowel bars in exactly the same way as provided in column bases. Allowance shall be made in length and width of the cap to allow for piles being slightly out of true position after being driven.
6.9.4.2 General consideration - The pile cap alongwith the column pedestal shall be deep enough to allow for the necessary anchorage of the column and pile reinforcement. Although they are assumed to act as a simply supported beam and are designed for the usual conditions of bending moment and shear force, there is a tendency to fail in bursting due to high principal tension. This should be resisted by reinforcement going around outer piles in the group (usually \# 12 @ 150).

Generally adopted configuration for pile caps alongwith plan arrangement of reinforcement details are shown in Fig. 6.10.
6.9.4.3 The clear overhang of the pile cap beyond the outermost pile in the group shall normally be 100 to 150 mm , depending upon the pile size.


Fig. 6.10 Generally Adopted Configuration for Pile Caps (Along with Plan Arrangement of Reinforcement)
6.9.4.4 A levelling course of plain concrete of about 80 mm thickness may be provided under the pile caps, as required.
6.9.4.5 The clear cover for the main reinforcement for the bottom of cap shall not be less than 60 mm .
6.9.4.6 The reinforcement from the pile should be properly tied to the pile cap.
6.9.4.7 A typical arrangement of bars in a pile cap supporting a column between two piles is illustrated in Fig. 6.11 and typical details of a pile cap resting on 3 piles is illustrated in Fig. 6.12.

### 6.9.5 Grade Beams

6.9.5.1 The grade beams supporting the walls shall be designed taking due account of arching effect due to masonry above the beam. The beam with masonry behaves as a deep beam due to composite action.
6.9.5.2 The minimum overall depth of grade beams shall be 150 mm . The reinforcement at the bottom should be kept continuous and an equal amount may be provided at top to a distance of quarter span both ways from pile or footing centres as the case may be. The longitudinal reinforcement both at top and bottom should not be less than three bars of 10 mm diameter (mild steel) and stirrups of 6 mm diameter bars spaced at a maximum spacing of 300 mm (see Fig. 6.13).
6.9.5.3 In expansive soils, the grade beams shall be kept a minimum of 80 mm clear off the ground. In other soils, beams may rest on ground over a levelling concrete coarse of about 80 mm (see Fig. 6.14).
6.9.5.4 In case of exterior beams over piles in expansive soils, a ledge projection of 75 mm thickness and extending 80 mm into ground (see Fig. 6.14), shall be provided on outer side of beams.


# SECTION-BB 


Note - In a 2-pile system, sufficient care should be taken to transfer bending in the transverse direction.
Fig. 6.11 Typical Details of a 2-Pile Cap


SECTION-BB

SECTION-AA

PLAN
Fig. 6.12 Typical Details of a 3-Pile Cap


Fig. 6.13 Typical Longitudinal Section of a Grade Beam
6.14A BEAMS IN NON-EXPANSIVE SOILS
6.14B BEAMS IN EXPANSIVE SOILS

Fig. 6.14 Typical Sections of Grade Beams

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 7 

## Columns

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 7 

## COLUMNS

7.0 General-Reinforced concrete columns are used to transfer the load of the structure to its foundations. These are reinforced by means of main longitudinal bars to resist compression and/or bending; and transverse steel (ties) to resist bursting force.

The column or strut is a vertical compression member, the effective length of which exceeds three times its least lateral dimension.

### 7.1 Longitudinal Reinforcement

7.1.1 In a reinforced column, the area of longitudinal reinforcement shall not be less than 0.8 percent nor more than 6 percent of the gross cross-sectional area of the column.

The area of longitudinal reinforcement should normally not exceed 4 percent of the gross crosssectional area of the column. This percentage can be considered as the maximum from practical considerations.

However where bars from one column have to be lapped with those of another column above, the total maximum percentage of 6 percent may be allowed at the lapping. Proper placing and compacting of concrete should be ensured at the place of lapping.
7.1.2 A minimum number of 4 bars shall be provided in a column and six bars in a circular column with helical reinforcement.
7.1.3 The bars shall be not less than 12 mm in diameter and spacing of the bars along the periphery of the column shall not exceed 300 mm .
7.1.4 In the case of pedestals in which the longitudinal reinforcement is not taken into account in strength calculations, nominal longitudinal reinforcement of not less than 0.15 percent of the gross cross-sectional area shall be provided.

Note - Pedestal is a compression member, the effective length of which does not exceed 3 times the least lateral dimension.
7.1.5 Dowels and Bar Supports - Dowels and bar supports, spacer bars, bar chairs, etc, should be specifically listed on the structural drawing and should be scheduled in that portion of the structure in which they are first required so that they can be delivered with reinforcement and are available for placement in time. Footing dowels shall be scheduled with footings rather than in column schedules (see Section 6 for requirements of dowels in footing).

### 7.2 Transverse Reinforcement

7.2.1 A reinforcement concrete compression member shall have transverse or helical reinforcement so disposed that every longitudinal bar nearest to the compression face has effective lateral support against buckling. The effective lateral support is given by transverse reinforcement either in the form of circular rings capable of taking up circumferential tension or by polygonal links (lateral ties) with internal angle not exceeding $135^{\circ}$.
7.2.2 Arrangement of Transverse Reinforcement - Where the longitudinal bars are not spaced more than 75 mm on either side, transverse reinforcement need only to go round corner and alternate bars for the purpose of providing effective supports (see Fig. 7.1).

Fig. 7.1
7.2.3 If the longitudinal bars spaced at a distance not exceeding 48 times the diameter of the tie are effectively tied in two directions, additional longitudinal bars in between these bars should be tied in one direction by open ties (see Fig. 7.2).

Fig. 7.2

7.2.4 Where the longitudinal reinforcing bars in a compression member are placed in more than one row, effective lateral support to the longitudinal bars in the inner rows may be assumed to have been provided if:
a) transverse reinforcement is provided for the outermost row, and
b) no bar of the inner row is closer to the nearest compression face than three times the diameter of the largest bar in the inner row (see Fig. 7.3).

Fig. 7.3
7.2.5 Where the longitudinal reinforcing bars in compression member are grouped (not in contact) and each group adequately tied with transverse reinforcement in accordance with 7.2.1, the transverse reinforcement for the compression member as a whole may be provided on the assumption that each group is a single longitudinal bar for purpose of determining the pitch and diameter of the transverse reinforcement in accordance with 7.2.1. The diameter of such transverse reinforcement need not, however, exceed 20 mm (see Fig. 7.4).

Fig. 7.4

A few examples of column ties are illustrated in Fig. 7.5.

### 7.2.6 Pitch and Diameter of Lateral Ties

7.2.6.1 Pitch - The pitch of the transverse reinforcement shall not be more than the least of the following distances (see Fig. 7.6A):
a) the least lateral dimension of the compression member,
b) sixteen times the smallest diameter of the longitudinal reinforcing bar to be tied, and
c) forty eight times the diameter of the transverse reinforcement.
7.2.6.2 Diameter - The diameter of the polygonal links or lateral ties shall not be less than one-fourth of diameter of the largest longitudinal bar, and in no case less than 5 mm .
7.2.7 Helical Reinforcement (Spirally Reinforced) (see Fig. 7.6B).
7.2.7.1 Pitch-Helical reinforcement shall be of regular formation with the turns of the helix spaced evenly and its ends shall be anchored properly by providing one and a half extra turns of the spiral preferably with a $135^{\circ}$ hook. The pitch of the helical turns shall be not more than 75 mm or one-sixth of core diameter of the column, nor less than 25 mm or 3 times the diameter of steel bar forming helix. Tension lap length shall be provided at lap splices.

Note - It is important to note that when the ratio of the volume of helical reinforcement provided to the volume of the core is greater than $0.36\left(\frac{A_{2}}{A_{1}}-1\right) \frac{f_{2}}{f_{1}}$, the strength of the compression member may be increased by 1.05 times the strength of similar member with lateral ties.
where
$A_{2}=$ gross area of the section,
$A_{1}=$ area of the core of the helically reinforced column measured to the outside diameter of the helix,
$f_{2 k}=$ characteristic compressive strength of the concrete, and
$f_{1}=$ characteristic strength of the helical reinforcement but not exceeding $415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.
7.2.7.2 Diameter - The diameter shall be not less than one-fourth of the diameter of the largest longitudinal bar, and in no case less than 5 mm .
7.2.8 Temporary Stirrups - At least two temporary fixing stirrups should be provided to hold splices in position (see Fig. 7.7) or to stiffen the helically bound columns during fabrication. It is better to detail and schedule such stirrups in the drawing. The stirrups coming above the floor shall not be removed until the next column is erected.


Fig. 7.5 Typical Arrangement of Column Ties (Continued)

7.5B EXAMPLES OF ARRANGING BUNDLE BARS IN COLUMNS

Fig. 7.5 Typical Arrangement of Column Ties

Fig. 7.6 Bar Spacing Requirements in Columns


Fig. 7.7 Temporary Fixing of Stirrups
7.2.9 Large Columns - Where reinforcement for very wide columns is to be fabricated in separate cages and erected in sections, they should be held together by at least 12 mm diameter bars spaced at double the stirrup spacing (see Fig. 7.8). Special requirements, if any, should be indicated by the designer.

### 7.3 Splicing of Column Reinforcement

7.3.1 General-Splicing is normally effected by the lapping of bars. The lengths of laps in the main bars shall conform to the values given in Section 4 (Tables 4.2 to 4.4). The bottom of the bars are normally at floor level. In exceptional cases, the bars may extend over more than one storey, provided that check is made to ensure that intersecting steel from beams, etc, can be placed through the column without difficulty, that the column reinforcement can be properly supported, and the concrete can be properly placed. Some of the bars terminating below floor level require separate splicing (see also Section 4). Typical splice details are shown in Fig. 7.9 (A to E) for both internal and external columns.
7.3.2 Where a column at a particular floor is smaller (in cross-section) than the column immediately below it, the vertical bars from the
lower column shall be offset to come within the upper column, or dowel shall be used. The slope of the inclined portion shall not exceed 1 in 6 . In detailing offset column bars, a bar diameter should be added to the desired offset; and in the corner of the square columns, the bars should be offset along the diagonal.
7.3.3 Longitudinal reinforcement bars in square or rectangular columns should be offset bent into the column above. Longitudinal bars in round columns where the column size is not changed should be offset bent if maximum number of bars are desired in the column above. The general practice is to sketch the offset for the corner bars which should be bent diagonally and make this the typical offset dimension for all the bars in the column.
7.3.4 For offset between column faces up to a maximum of 75 mm , the longitudinal bars should be offset bent. When the offset exceeds 75 mm , the longitudinal bars in the column below should be terminated at the floor slab and separate dowels used (see Fig. 7.9B and 7.9D).
7.3.5 Where adjoining beam is not provided, the height of the column equal to say 75 mm above the-floor level should be cast along with the lower column so that a kicker can be formed to place the column shutters (see Fig. 7.9C).


Fig. 7.8 Reinforcement in Cages for Long Columns

7.9A SPLICE WITH LOWER BARS CRANKED INTO POSITION INSIDE UPPER BARS (INTERMEDIATE FLOOR)
7.3.6 When the bar arrangement changes between floors, bars may extend through, stop off, or require separate dowels (Fig. 7.9B). Each situation requires its own solution. Steel equal to an area and bond capacity to that in the column above shall be extended. Column bars shall be spliced at the top of upstand beams, if available, rather than at floor level.
7.3.7 Where the column verticals are offset bent, additional ties/spirals shall be provided (see Fig. 7.10) and placed at a distance not more than 8 bar diameters from the point of the bend. For practical purpose, 3 closely spaced ties are usually used, one of which may be part of the regularly spaced ties plus two/extra ties. The designer shall indicate on the drawing the general arrangement of vertical bars and all tie arrangements.

The number of additional ties/spirals should be designed on the assumption that the horizontal thrust to be resisted shall be 1.5 times the horizontal components of the normal stress in the inclined portion of the bars.
7.3.8 Welded splice or other positive connections may be used as butt splices for
vertical column bars instead of lapped splices. For bars of size 32 mm and above, such splices or connections may be used to avoid overcrowding of the bars due to extremely long laps which would otherwise be required. Special preparation of the ends of the vertical bars is usually required. Where bars are welded, the most common practice is to provide a square-cut end at the top and a double bevelled end on the bottom of the upper bar to rest on the square cut end (see Fig. 7.11). This permits filling the resulting space with weld metal to develop the splice. Where a welded sleeve or a mechanical device is used, both ends of the bar may be either square cut or standard shear cut, depending upon the type of connection used. Since the point of splice is to be staggered between alternate vertical bars and the splice location will depend upon the design requirements, the designer should indicate the types of splice permissible and their location on the drawing.
7.4 Bundled bars shall be tied, wired or otherwise fastened to ensure that they remain in position. End-bearing compression splices should