be held concentric, all bundles of column verticals should be held by additional ties at each end of end-bearing splices, and any short splice bars added for tension should be tied as part of the bundle within the limit of 4 bars in a bundle. A corner of a tie should be provided at each bundle.
7.5 Column in Flat Slabs - Mushroom heads are normally cast with the columns, and the details of reinforcement should be such that the steel can be formed into a separate cage. Therefore, it should be ensured that the column stirrups end below the mushroom head to enable a properly bonded cage to be positioned (see Fig. 7.12).

Note - The designer shall determine the amount of steel required in the mushroom to control cracks arising from the out-of-balance moments.
7.6 Column-Beam Junction - Typical details of a column-beam junction are illustrated in Fig. 7.13.
7.9C SPIICE WITH UPPER BARS CRANKED INTO POSIIION INSIDE LOWER BARS

At column-beam intersections, it is better to avoid main beam bars clashing with main column bars.

If splice bars are used (see Fig. 7.13), the beam cages may be prefabricated and splice bars placed in position after the beam reinforcement has been positioned in place. This also provides considerable scope for positioning support bars without resorting to cranking and avoiding intersecting beam and column reinforcement. However, this detail requires extra steel due to the additional laps.

Where the beam does not frame into the column on all four sides to approximately the full width of the column, ensure that the stirrups are provided in the column for the full depth of the beam, or alternately, that special U-bars are detailed with the beam to restrain the column bars from buckling and to strengthen the concrete in compression. This is especially important where
7.9D SPLICE WITH THE LOWER BARS CRANKED INTO A POSITION INSIDE THE UPPER BARS WHEN THE RELATIVE DISPLACEMENT OF COLUMN FACES IS LESS THAN 75 MM

7.9E Splicing when the Lower Bars Cranked into a Position inside the Upper Bars with Stepping of Columns on One Side

Note - It is importahl to note that splices should be staggered within the column

Fig. 7.9 Splicing of Column Bars at Intermediate Floors
the floor concrete is of a weaker grade than the column concrete (see Fig. 7.14 and 7.15 ).

In general, it is advisable to use U-bars at the non-continuous ends of beams of depth greater than 600 mm .

Note - It is important to note that a joint by itself shall have a dependable strength sufficient to resist the most adverse load combinations sustained by the adjoining

Fig. 7.10 Splice with Ofiset Cranke: BAR IN A ColumN
A. END BEARING COMPRESSION SPLICE
B. WELOED BUTT SPLICE TENSION/COMPRESSION

Fig. 7.11 Typical Details of Butt Splices
members as specified by the appropriate loading code. A higher factor of safety is sometimes necessary for joints. Design and detailing of the joint should be done to satisfy this condition.

### 7.7 Column with Corbel Joints

7.7.1 Corbels - A corbel is a short cantilever beam (see Fig. 7.16) in which the principal load is applied in such a way that the distance between the line of action of the load and the face of the supporting member is less than 0.6 d and the depth at the outer face of the bearing is greater than one-half of the effective depth at the face of the supporting member.
7.7.2 Main Reinforcement - The main tension reinforcement in a corbel should be not less than 0.4 percent and not more than 1.3 percent of the section at the face of the supporting member, and should be adequately anchored.


Fig. 7.12 Reinforcement of Mushroom Heads

Fig. 7.13 Beam-Column Intersection

7.14A FIXED END JOINT IN A COLUMN
7.14B TERMINATION OF COLUMN BARS INSIDE A SLAB

Fig. 7.14 Typical Details of End Joints in a Column

Anchor the reinforcement at the front face of the corbel either by welding it to a transverse bar of equal stength or by bending back the bars to form loops; in either case, the bearing area of the load should not project beyond the straight portion of the bars forming the main tension reinforcement (see Fig. 7.17 and 7.18).

Fig. 7.15 Typical Details of a Beam-Column Junction at Exterior Column

Fig. 7.16 Truss Anology for Corbel Design

Fig. 7.17

Note - The limitation on reinforcement percentages is based on the limited number of tests available.
7.7.3 Horizontal Force - When the corbel is required to resist a horizontal force in direction $H$ applied to the bearing plate (see Fig. 7.19) because of shringkage or temperature changes, provide additional reinforcement to transmit this force in its entirety. This reinforcement should be welded to the bearing plate and adequately anchored within the supporting member.
7.7.4 Shear Reinforcement - Provide shear reinforcement in the form of horizontal stirrups distributed in the upper two-thirds of the effective depth of the corbel at the column face. This

Fig. 7.18
reinforcement should have an area of at least onehalf of the area of the main tension reinforcement and should be adequately anchored (see Fig. 7.19).
7.8 Detailing of Reinforcement - Columns should be detailed by means of enlarged views. Indicate the levels of the bottom (top of bars at floor level) and top of the column (at top of slab or beam or upstand beam) and the floor height, if necessary. Indicate on the schedule the positions of all intermediate beams. Show each bar mark once, and provide adequate sections showing all main bars and the arrangement of stirrups. Keep in view the effect of providing kickers on levels.

Fig. 7.19

# SECTION 8 <br> Beams

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 8 

## BEAMS

8.1 Arrangement of Bars - The main consideration when arranging bars in beam is to obtain the most economical layout to satisfy the design requirements. It shall also satisfy the relevant rules concerning horizontal and vertical spacing of bars and required bottom and side covers. While fixing the overall dimensions of beams, slenderness limits for beams to ensure lateral stability and span-to-depth ratios to control deflection, shall be kept in view.

The following points shall also be noted in detailing (see Fig. 8.1).
a) The bars shall be symmetrically placed about the vertical centre line of the beams.
b) Where there are only two bars in a row, these shall be placed at the outer edges.
c) Where bars of different diameter are placed in a single bottom row, the larger diameter bars are placed on the outer side.
d) Where bars in different horizontal rows have different diameter, the larger diameter bars shall be placed in the bottom row.

### 8.2 Longitudinal Reinforcement

8.2.1 Minimum Distance Between Individual Bars - The following rule shall apply:
a) the horizontal distance between two parallel bars shall be usually not less than the following:

1) diameter of the bar, if the diameters are equal;
2) diameter of the larger bar, if the diameters are unequal; and
3) 5 mm more than the nominal maximum size of coarse aggregate.
Note - This does not preclude the use of larger size aggregates beyond the congested reinforcement in the same

Fig. 8.1 Minimum Clearance Between Individual Bars

member; the size of aggregate may be reduced around congested reinforcement to comply with this provision.
b) Greater horizontal distance than the minimum specified in (a) should be provided, wherever possible. However, when needle vibrators are employed, the horizontal distance between bars of a group may be reduced to two-thirds of the nominal maximum size of aggregate, provided vibrator can be used without difficulty.
c) Where there are two or more rows of bars, the bars shall be vertically in line and the minimum vertical distance between bars shall be 15 mm or two-thirds the nominal maximum size of aggregate or the maximum size of the bar, whichever is the greatest.
The minimum spacing requirements of reinforcing bars in beams is illustrated in Fig. 8.1 and Fig. 8.2.

### 8.2.2 Tension Reinforcement

8.2.2.1 Minimum reinforcement - The minimum area of tension reinforcement shall not be less than that given by the following:

8.2A VERTICAL PAIRS
where
$A_{s}=$ minimum area of tension reinforcement,
$b=$ breadth of the beam or the breadth of the web of T-beam,
$d=$ effective depth, and
$f_{y}=$ characteristic strength of reinforcement in $\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.
8.2.2.2 Maximum reinforcement - The maximum area of tension reinforcement shall not exceed $0.04 b D$, where $b$ is the width of the beam rib or web and $D$ is the total depth of the beam.
8.2.2.3 Maximum distance between bars in tension - Unless the calculation of crack widths shows that a greater spacing of bars is acceptable, the following requirement should be fulfilled for control of flexural cracking:

The horizontal distance between parallel reinforcement bars, or groups near tension face of a beam shall not be greater than the value given in Table 8.1 depending on the amount of redistribution carried out in analysis and the characteristic strength of :he reinforcement (see Fig. 8.3).
8.2B HORIZONTAL PAIRS

VERTICAL SPACING SHOULD BE NOT LESS THAN 15 m m OR $2 / 3 h_{0}$ OR $\emptyset$ WHICHEVER IS GREATER.
HORIZONTAL SPACING SHOULD BE NOT LESS THAN ( $\mathrm{h}_{0}+5 \mathrm{~mm}$ ) OR EQUIVALENT DIAMETERS
$h_{0}=$ NOMINAL/MAX.SIZE OF AGGREGATE $\phi=$ EQUIVALENT DIAMETER OF BAR

Fig. 8.2 Minimum Spacing Between Groups of Bars


Fig. 8.3 Reinforcement Spacing Rules for Crack Control

TABLE 8.1 MAXIMUM CLEAR DISTANCE BETWEEN TENSION BARS

|  | Percentage Redistribution to or From <br> Section Considered |  |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| $f_{1}$ | -30 | -15 | 0 | +15 | +30 |
|  | Clear Distance Between Bars |  |  |  |  |
| $\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ | mm | mm | mm | mm | mm |
| 250 | 215 | 260 | 300 | 300 | 300 |
| 415 | 125 | 155 | 180 | 210 | 235 |
| 500 | 105 | 130 | 150 | 175 | 195 |

Note - The spacings given in the table are not applicable to members subjected to particularly aggressive environments unless in the calculation of the moment of resistance. $f_{2}$ has been limited to $300 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ in limit state design.
8.2.3 Compression Reinforcement - The maximum area of compression reinforcement shall not exceed 0.04 bD . Compression reinforcement shall be enclosed by stirrups for effective restraint. The anchorage length of straight bars in compression shall be equal to the development length of bars in compression.
8.2.4 Side Face Reinforcement - Where the depth of the web in a beam exceeds 750 mm side face reinforcement shall be provided along the two faces. The total area of such reinforcement shall be not less than 0.1 percent of the web area and shall be distributed equally on two faces at a
spacing not exceeding 300 mm or web thickness whichever is less (see Fig. 8.4).

### 8.3 Detailing of Shear Reinforcement

a) A stirrup in the reinforced concrete beam shall pass around or be otherwise adequately secured to the outer most tension and compression reinforcement, and such stirrups should have both its ends anchored properly in any one of the fashion detailed in Fig. 8.5. In T-beams and I-beams, such reinforcement shall pass around longitudinal bars located close to the outer face of the flange.

Fig. 8.4 Side Face Reinforcement in Beams


Fig. 8.5 Different Ways of Anchoring Ends of Stirrups

While adopting stirrups, different shapes (see Fig. 8.6) may be considered depending on constructional requirements keeping in view the end anchorage requirements. However, while choosing a particular shape for a particular situation, its validity should be considered from structural point of view.
b) Bent-up Bars - Tensile reinforcement which is inclined and carried through the depth of beam can also be considered to act as shear reinforcement provided it is anchored in accordance with 4.3.5 (see Fig. 8.7).

Usually two bars are bent up at a time at an angle $45^{\circ}$ to $60^{\circ}$ to the longitudinal axis of
the beam but other angles can also be adopted.

It is usual practice to combine bent up bars and vertical stirrups to resist the shear since some of the longitudinal bars are bent up when they are no longer required at the bottom (see Fig. 8.7).
c) Maximum Spacing - The maximum spacing of shear reinforcement measured along the axis of the member shall not exceed $0.75 d$ for vertical stirrups and $d$ for inclined stirrups at $45^{\circ}$, where $d$ is the effective depth of the section under consideration. In no case shall it exceed 450 mm .


Note Preferred shapes for torsion $1,2,3,4,6,7,13$ and 14
Fig. 8.6 Different Shapes of Stirrups
d) Use of Multi-Legged Stirrups - Multi-legged stirrups are required from the consideration of shear stresses in the beam, or where restraint against the buckling of bars in compression is needed. The rules for stirrups reinforcing steel in compression are the same as those for columns. The vertical stirrups may be provided as two-legged stirrups, fourlegged stirrups or six-legged stirrups at the same section according to actual requirements (see Fig. 8.8). Open type stirrups as shown in Fig. 8.9 may be used for beam-slab construction where the width of rib is more than 450 mm .
e) Stirrups in Edge Beams - Where designer shows stirrups in any edge or spandrel beam, these stirrups shall be closed and at least one longitudinal bar shall be located in each corner of the beam section, the size of this bar is to be at least equal to the diameter of the stirrup but not less than 12 mm . These details shall be clearly indicated by the designer. Typical cross-sectional details are shown in Fig. 8.10 for normal and upturned edge or spandrel beams. For easier placing of the longitudinal bars in the beam, details for two-piece closed stirrups are also shown. For the same reason, $90^{\circ}$ stirrup hook is preferred.
f) Minimum Reinforcement - The minimum shear reinforcement in the form of stirrups shall not be less than the following (see Fig. 8.11).
8.7A REQUIREMENTS FOR BENT-UP BARS

Fig. 8.7 Bent-up Bars (Continued)


8.7B TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF BENT-1JP BARS AND VERTICAL STIRRUPS IN A CONTINUOUS BEAM

Fig. 8.7 Bent-Up Bars

Fig. 8.8 Examples of M1ilti-Legged Stirrups


Fig. 8.9 Multi-Legged Open Type Stirrups Cross-Section of a Broad Shallow Beam with 6-Legged Stirrups

$$
A_{v v}, \operatorname{Min}=\frac{0.4 b S_{v}}{f_{y}}
$$

where

$$
A_{v v}=\text { total cross-sectional area of }
$$

$b=$ breadth of the beam or breadth of the web of flanged beam; and
$S_{v}=$ stirrup spacing along the length of the member;
$f_{y}=$ characteristic strength of the stirrup reinforcement in $\mathrm{N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ which shall not be taken greater than $415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

However, in members of minor structural importance such as lintels, or where the maximum shear stress calculated is less than the permissible value, this provision need not be complied with.
g) Beam of Varying Depth - Detail stirrup sizes individually where beams have varying depth. A range of stirrup sizes nas to be detailed (see Fig. 8.12 and also 8.10).

STIRRUPS AS CLOSED TIE

STIRRUPS AND TOP BARS
FORM CLOSED TIE

Fig. 8.10 Typical Details of Reinforcement in Edge and Spandrel Beam


Fig. 8.11 Reinforcement Requirements for Beams

Fig. 8.12 Use of Concertina Stirrups in Beams of Varying Depth
h) Force not Applied to Top of Beam - Where a load transfer is through the bottom or side of a beam (for example, where one beam frames into another), ensure that there is sufficient suspension or hang-up reinforce-
men. at the junction in the main beam in the form of stirrups to transfer the force to the top of the beam. If the load is large, bent-up bars may also be used in addition to stirrups (see Fig. 8.13).


Fig. 8.13
8.4 Torsion Reinforcement - When a member is designed for torsion, reinforcement for the same shall be provided as follows (see Fig. 8.14A):
a) The transverse reinforcement for torsion shall be rectangular closed stirrups placed perpendicular to the axis of the member. The spacing of the stirrups shall not exceed the least of $x_{1},\left(x_{1}+y_{1}\right) / 4$ and 300 mm , where $x_{1}$ and $y_{1}$ are respecively the short and long dimensions of the stirrup. In a beam with multi-legged stirrup, only the stirrup going around the outer face shall be considered to resist torsional force. In inembers having a complex cross-section (such as I and T-sections), each part (flanges, ribs, webs, etc,) should contain closed stirrups of its own (see Fig. 8.14B and C).
b) Longitudinal reinforcement shall be placed as close as is practicable to the corners of the cross-section and in all cases there shall be at least one longitudinal bar in each corner of the ties.
c) When the cross-sectional dimensions of the members exceeds 450 mm , additional longitudinal reinforcements shall be provided at the side faces and the total area of such reinforcement shall be not less than 0.1 percent of the web area and shall be distributed equally on two faces at a spacing not exceeding 300 mm or web thickness whichever is lower.
8.5 Curtailment of Reinforcement - The extent of curtailment of main reinforcement in beams should be related to the bending moment diagram subject to the conditions specified in Section 4. However, simplified curtailment rules illustrated in Fig. 8.15, 8.16 and 8.17 may be used for continuous beams, simply supported beams and cantilever beams, respectively under the following circumstances:
a) the beams are designed for predominantly uniformly distributed loads; and
b) in the case of continuous beams, the spans are approximately equal (which do not differ by more than 15 percent of the longest).
8.14A SHEAR AND TORSION REINFORCEMENT IN BEAMS

Fig. 8.14 Sear and Torsion Reinforcement in Rectangular and Flanged Beams


Note Applicable to continuous beams with approximately equal spans (not differing more than 15 percent) and subjected to predominantly U.D.I., and designed without compression steel.

Fig. 8.15 Simplified Curtailment Rules for Continuous Beams

*In case partially restraint members, 35 percent of the reinforcement shall also be provided for negative moment at the support and fully anchored.

Fig. 8.16 Simplified Curtailment Rules for Simply Supported Beam

*NOT LESS THAN GREATED OF 0.5 L OR L4

*NOT LESS THAN 0.5 ABT

0.25 ABT (MIN.) SUBJECT TO MINIMUM OF TWO BARS, IF NOT DESIGNED AS A DOUBLY REINFORCED SECTION.

8.17A CANTILEVER BEAM PROJECTING FROM A COLUMN

Fig. 8.17 Simplified Curtailment Rules for a Cantilever Beam (Continued)

8.6 Edge and Spandrel Beam — T-beams or L-beams are usually designed as internal and external beams supporting a floor slab; where part of the slab form the horizontal portions of the T- or L-beam.

Where the reinforcement of a slab which is considered as the flange of T- or L-beam, is parallel to the beam, transverse reinforcement extending to the lengths indicated in Fig. 8.18 shall be provided. If the quantity of such transverse reinforcement is not specially determined by calculations it shall not be less than 60 percent of main reinforcement in the centre of the span of slab constituting the flange.

8.7 Corners and Cranked Beams — Recommendations for various methods of reinforcing corners are giving herein based on reference 6. It is to be noted that closing corners present no major.


8 17B CANTILEVER BEAM PROJECTING FROM A BEAM OVER A COLUMN
Fig. 8.17 Simplified Curtailment Rules for a Cantilever Beam

Fig. 8.18 Transverse Reinforcement in Flange of T-Beam when Main ReinforceMENT OF Slab is Parallel to Beam

problem, but opening corners require careful detailing (see Fig. 8.19 and Fig. 8.20).

Fig. 8.19 Opening Corner

Fig. 8.20 Closing Corner
8.7.1 $90^{\circ}$-Opening Corners With 1 Percent Reinforcement or Less - Where the amount of reinforcement in the beam is equal to or less than 1 percent, detail the reinforcement as shown in Fig. 8.21 or Fig. 8.22, the splay steel being equal to 50 percent of the main steel.

Fig. 8.21

Fig. 8.22 Hairpin with Splay Reinforcement
8.7.2 $90^{\circ}$-Opening Corners With More Than 1 Percent Reinforcement - If the area of reinforcement exceeds one percent, provide transverse steel as well as splay steel as in Fig. 8.23. (The use of a splay is also strongly recommended.)

Fig. 8.23
8.7.3 Cranked Beams - The recommended methods of detailing are shown in Fig. 8.24, 8.25 and 8.26 .

Fig. 8.24

Fig. 8.25


Fig. 8.26
8.7.4 Beam and Column Junction - Where a column extends above a beam, bend the beam top reinforcement down into the column but if it is necessary to bend the bars up, detail additional steel as in Fig. 8.27.

Fig. 8.27
8.7.5 Closing Corners - At closing corners provide adequate radii (equal to at least 7.5 bar diameters) and some additional reinforcement as in Fig. 8.28.
8.8 Beam of Different Depths - Typical arrangements of reinforcement over the support when the beam on either side of the support are of different depths is shown in Fig. 8.29.
8.9 Tie Members - As a tie is under pure tension there is no tendency to burst like an axially loaded column and therefore binders are not required. But, in order to form the longitudinal bars into a cage, a minimum number of links is used. As there is theoretically no shear or bending moment acting on a tie, only main longitudinal reinforcement is required. The main
8.9.1 End Details - These shall provide adequate anchors and correct bond lengths. In

Fig. 8.28

Fig. 8.29 Beams at Different Depths
consideration is the end conditions where a method should be devised to anchor the tie and/or spread its axial load into the connecting members.
practice a small splay at the ends of the tie is made to allow for any slight moment that may be induced at the ends. Simple end details for light loading are shown in Fig. 8.30. The ties are shown by the arrows.


Fig. 8.30 Tie End Connections for Light Loading

For heavier axial loading, the ends shall be more splayed out to distribute the load adequately. Typical details are shown in Fig. 8.31.

In Fig. 8.31 (A and B) it will be seen that as the splay is increased in size, the embedded and hence bond length of the main tie bars is also increased.

In Fig. 8.31C extra links or hoops shall be provided as shown to resist the tendency of the large loop to burst under axial load. In Fig. 8.31 the main bars have been shown with double lines for clarity. When detailing they would be shown thick lines in the normal way.

Fig. 8.31 Tie End Connections for High Loading

8.10 Haunched Beams - In very heavily loaded beams, for example a warehouse structure, the shear stress and negative bending moment at the supports will be high. An economical method of overcoming this problems is to provide the beams with haunches as shown in Fig. 8.32. There are no rules governing the size of haunches, but those shown in Fig. 8.32 are considered ideal.
8.10.1 Main Reinforcement in haunches Figure 8.33 shows the typical main tensile
reinforcement in an end external haunch. The main bars are carried through the haunch as if it did not exist, with pairs of bars $a, b, c$, etc, stopped off in accordance with a cut-off bending moment diagram. Bars $h$ are placed parallel to the haunch to carry vertical links (omitted in the figure for clarity).

A similar method of reinforcing to that shown in Fig. 8.33 can also be used for internal haunches. This is shown in Fig. 8.34.

Fig. 8.32 Beam Haunches

Fig. 8.33 Main Reinforcement in End Haunches (See Fig. 8.33 for Section xx)

Fig. 8.34 Main Reinforcement in Haunches (See Fig. 8.37 for Section xx)

8.10.2 Stirrups in Haunches - The stirrups in haunches can either be positioned normally to the haunch as shown in Fig. 8.35A, or placed vertically as in Fig. 8.35B. Most designers prefer method shown in Fig. 8.35B.

Fig. 8.35 Links or Ties in Haunchs

If in Fig. 8.33 and 8.34 , the $h$ bars were placed near the outside edge of the beam they would foul the outside main horizontal bars. They should, therefore, be placed on the inside as shown in Fig. 8.36 so that two different sets of stirrups are required throughout the whole length of the haunch (see 8.10).
8.11 Beam of Varying Depth - Stirrups need to be detailed individually wherever beams have varying depths and a range of stirrup sizes have to be adopted.
8.11.1 The different stirrup sizes may be reduced in number by using concertina stirrups (see Fig. 8.12) with the legs lapped with tension lap length. The difference between the lengths of successive groups should be at least 50 mm . In order to maintain the correct size of the member. use closed stirrups at centre-to-centre distances of at least 1000 mm . Ensure that concertina stirrups are properly tied and maintained in position during concreting.

Fig. 8.36 Haunch Links

### 8.12 Intersection of Beams

8.12.1 General - Ensure that, at beam-beam intersections, reinforcement is so arranged that layers in mutually perpendicular beams are at different levels.
8.12.2 Top Steel - It is good practice, for the following reasons, to pass the secondary beam steel over the main beam steel:
a) secondary beam steel is usually of smaller diameter and requires less cover, and
b) secondary beam top reinforcement is available to act as a support for the slab top reinforcement.

Where the main beam is very heavily stressed, however, it may be more economical to pass the main beam steel over the secondary reinforcement.
8.12.3 Bottom Steel - To accommodate bottom bars, it is good practice to make secondary beams shallower than main beams, even if by only 50 mm (see Fig. 8.37). Where beam soffits are at the same level, the secondary beam steel should pass over the main beam steel. Unless the secondary beam span is short, bars of diameter less than 25 mm be draped (see Fig. 8.38). Cranking of bottom bars is usually not necessary.

If it is required that the beam cages be preassembled, provide splice bars 7.6).
8.13 Openings in the Web - Adjacent openings for services in the web of flexural members shall be arranged so that no potential failure planes, passing through several openings, can develop. In considering this, the possible reversal of shear


Fig. 8.37
force, associated with the development of the flexural overstrength of the members, should be taken into account.
8.13.1 Small square or circular openings may be placed in the mid-depth of the web provided that cover requirements to longitudinal and transverse reinforcement are satisfied, and the clear distance between such openings, measured along the member, is not less than 150 mm . The area of small openings shall not exceed $1000 \mathrm{~mm}^{2}$ for members with an effective depth, $d$, less than or equal to 500 mm , or $0.004 d^{2}$ when the effective depth is more than 500 mm .

Note - Small openings with areas not exceeding those specified in 8.13 .1 are considered not to interfere with the development of the strength of the member. However, such openings must not encroach into the flexural compression zone of the member. Therefore, the edge of a small opening should be no closer than $0.33 d$ to the compression face of the member, as required by|8.12.3. When two or more small openings are placed transversely in the web, the distance between the outermost edges of the small openings should be considered as being equivalent to the height of one large opening and the member should be designed accordingly.
8.13.2 Webs with openings larger than that permitted by $\mathbf{8 . 1 2 . 1}$ shall be subject to rational design to ensure that the forces and moments are adequately transferred in the vicinity of the openings. This will require the design of orthogonal or diagonal reinforcement around such openings.
8.13.3. Whenever the largest dimension of an opening exceed one-quarter of the effective depth of the member, it is to be considered large. Such openings shall not be placed in the web where they could affect the flexural or shear capacity of the member, nor where the total shear stress exceed $0.36 \sqrt{f_{i x}}$, or in potential plastic hinge zones. In no case shall the height of the opening exceed $0.4 d$ nor shall its edge be closer than $0.33 d$ to the compression face of the member to
( Tie to side of stirrup)
FIG. 8.38
ensure that the moments and shear forces can be effectively transmitted by the compression zone of the member.
8.13.4 For openings defined by 8.13.3, longitudinal and transverse reinforcement shall be placed in the compression side of the web to resist one and one-half times the shear across the opening. Shear transfer in the tension side of the web shall be neglected.

Note - Only the part of the web above or below an opening which is in compression should be considered to transmit shear. The stiffness of the tension part is considered to be negligible because of extensive cracking. The amount, location and anchorage of the longitudinal reinforcement in the compression part of the web above the opening must be determined from first principles so as to resist one and one-half times the moment induced by the shear force across the opening. Similarly shear reinforcement in the compression chord adjacent to the opening must resist 150 percent of the design shear force. This is to ensure that no failure occurs as a result of the local weakening of the member due to the opening. Effective diagonal reinforcement above or below the opening, resisting one and one-half times the shear and moment, is also acceptable.
8.13.5 Transverse web reinforcement, extending over the full depth of the web, shall be placed adjacent to both sides of a large opening over a distance not exceeding one-half of the effective depth of the member to resist twice the entire design shear across the opening.

Note - At either side of an opening where the moments and shear forces are introduced to the full section of a beam, horizontal splitting or diagonal tension cracks are to be expected. To control these cracks, transverse reinforcement resisting at least twice the design shear force, must be provided on both sides of the opening. Such stirrups can be distributed over a length not exceeding $0.5 d$ at either side immediately adjacent to the opening.
8.13.6 A typical detail of reinforcement around a large opening in the web of a beam, complying with the above requirements, are Shown in Fig. 8.39.


Fig. 8.39 Details of Requirements at a Large Opening in the Web of a Beam

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 9 

Floor Slabs

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 9 

## FLOOR SLABS

9.0 Solid Slabs - The requirements specified in 9.1 to 9.7.2.2 apply to solid slabs other than flat slabs.
9.1 Minimum Reinforcement - In solid reinforced concrete slabs, the reinforcement in either direction expressed as a percentage of the gross-sectional area of the concrete shall not be less than:
a) 0.15 percent where plain bars are used, and
b) 0.12 percent where high yield strength (hot rolled and cold twisted) deformed bars or welded wire fabric are used.

### 9.2 Spacing, Cover and Diameter

### 9.2.1 Spacing

a) The pitch of the bars for main tensile reinforcement in solid slab shall be not more than thrice the effective depth of such slab or 450 mm , whichever is smaller.
b) The pitch of the distribution bars or the pitch of the bars provided against shrinkage and temperature shall not be more than 5 times the effective depth of such slab or 450 mm , whichever is smaller. Table C-6 (see Appendix C) give area of bars for different spacing and diameter of bars.

### 9.2.2 Cover

a) The cover at each end of reinforcing bar shall be neither less than 25 mm nor less than twice the diameter of such bar.
b) The minimum cover to reinforcement (tension, compression, shear) shall be not less than 15 mm , nor less than the diameter of bar.
9.2.3 Bar Diameters - The main bars in the slab shall not be less than 8 mm (high yield strength bars) or 10 mm (plain bars) and distribution steel shall not be less than 6 mm diameter bars. The diameter of the bar shall not also be more than one-eighth of the slab thickness.

### 9.3 Simply Supported Slabs

9.3.1 Slabs Spanning in One Direction - A slab that is supported on two opposite sides only by either walls or beams is said to be spanning in one direction. The slab is considered as spanning in one direction even when the slab is supported on all four sides if the effective length of the slab exceeds two times its effective width. The shorter span is to be considered for design.

Figure 9.1 shows the general details of slab spanning in one direction. It clearly indicates the size and thickness of the slab and reinforcement, the cover and the spacing. Slab thickness shall be indicated both in plan and section. Where series of identical bars are used, it is customary to show only one bar. The bars in the shorter direction (main bars) are placed in the bottom layer. At least 50 percent of main reinforcement provided at mid span should extend to the supports. The remaining 50 percent should extend to within 0.11 of the support.

The bars in longer direction of the slab are called distribution or transverse steel. These assist in distribution of the stresses caused by the superimposed loading, temperature changes and shrinkage during the hardening process. These bars are placed in the upper layer and tied with the main steel bars to keep them in correct position during concreting.
9.3.2 Slabs Spanning in Two Directions - A simple slab spanning in two directions ( $l_{x} / l_{x} \leqslant 2$ ) and supported on four brick walls is shown in Fig. 9.2.

As the slab is spanning in both directions the reinforcement in each direction shall be considered as main reinforcement. The bars in the shorter direction are generally placed in the bottom layer and tied with the bars in the longer direction placed above at suitable intervals to keep their relative positions intact during concreting.

At least 50 percent of the tension reinforcement provided at mid-span should extend to the supports. The remaining 50 percent should extend to within $0.1 l_{x}$ or $0.1 l_{y}$ of the support, as appropriate, where $l_{x}$ and $l_{y}$ are effective spans in the shorter direction and longer direction, respectively.
9.4 Restrained Slabs - When the corners of a slab are prevented from lifting, the following simplified detailing rules may be applied, provided the slab is designed for predominantly uniformly distributed loads.

Note 1 - The analysis of uniformly distributed load and concentrated loads may be done separately, and with appropriate theories. The reinforcement quantities determined in this way should be superimposed.

Note 2 - If an end support is assumed to be a free support in the analysis, but if the character of the structure is such that restraint may nevertheless occur at the support, a restraint moment equal to half the mid-span moment in the strip concerned may be adopted.


FIG. 9.1 Typical Details of a Slab Spanning in One Direction


Fig. 9.2 Typical Details of a Slab Spanning in Two Directions

9.4.1 The slabs are considered as divided in each direction into middle strips and edge strips as shown in Fig. 9.3, the middle strip being threequarters of the width and each edge strip oneeighth of the width.
9.4.2 The tension reinforcement provided at mid-span in the middle strip shall extend in the lower part of the slab to within 0.251 of a continuous edge, or 0.151 of a discontinuous edge.
9.4.3 Over the continuous edges of a middle strip, the tension reinforcement shall extend in the upper part of the slab a distance of 0.151 from the support, and at least 50 percent shall extend a distance of 0.30 !.
9.4.4 At a discontinuous edge, negative moments may arise. They depend on the fixity at the edge of the slab but, in general, tension reinforcement equal to 50 percent of that provided at mid-span extending 0.11 into the span will be sufficient.
9.4.5 Reinforcement in edge strip parallel to the edge, shall comply with the minimum reinforcement requirement (9.1) and the requirements for torsion in 9.4.6. to 9.4.6.2.
9.4.6 Torsional Reinforcement - Torsional reinforcement shall be provided at any corner where the slab is simply supported on both edges meeting at that corner and is prevented from lifting unless the consequences of cracking are negligible. It shall consist of top and bottom reinforcement, each with layer of bars placed parallel to the sides of the slab and extending from the edges a minimum distance of one-fifth of the shorter span. The area of reinforcement per unit width in each of these four layers shall be three-quarters of the area required for the maximum mid-span moment per unit width in the slab (see Fig. 9.4A).
9.4.6.1 Torsional reinforcement equal to half that described in 9.4.6 shall be provided at a corner contained by edges over only one of which the slab is continuous. (see Fig. 9.4B.)
9.4.6.2 Torsional reinforcement need not be provided at any corner contained by edges over both of which the slab is continuous.
9.4.7 A slab shall be treated as spanning one way (in the shorter direction) when ratio of effective span in the longer direction to the effective span in the shorter direction is greater than 2 .
9.4.8 Figure 9.5 illustrates curtailment of bars in a restrained slab spanning in two directions based on the above rules using straight bars or bent-up bars.
9.4.9 Re-entrant Corners-Diagonal reinforcement shall be placed at all re-entrant corners to keep crack widths within limits (see Fig. 9.6).
9.5 Cantilever Slabs - The main reinforcement shall be placed in the top of cantilever slab extending to sufficient length over the support and back into the normal span. The method of curtailment shall conform to the requirements specified in Section 4.

Support to the top steel of cantilever slabs at spacings (for stools and chairs) should preferably be specified in the detailing drawing. The bending of the main bars should be such that they contribute to the supporting of the steel, that is, bars that extend to the end should have vertical bends, with a fixing bar at the bend.

The secondary steel at right angles to the support may be designed and detailed to carry construction loading in the propped condition, if necessary.

The deflection in cantilever slabs can be reduced by the addition of compression steel at the bottom. This would also be helpful in counteracting possible reversal of bending moments.
9.5.1 The simplified curtailment rules illustrated in Fig. 9.7 may be used for cantilever slabs when they are designed for predominantly uniformly distributed loads.

### 9.5.2 Tie Backs and Counter Masses to Cantilevers

9.5.2.1 Cantilever at the bottom of beams-Ensure, when a cantilever is at the bottom of a beam, the design of the stirrups in the beam provides for moment, shear, hanging tension and, if necessary, torsion. If possible, provide in the detailing of this steel for placing of the beam steel without the necessity of the threading of the main beam steel through the cantilever anchorage loops. The details should conform to the basic principles applicable to opening corner in retaining walls and the beams. Figure 9.8 provides three alternative methods of anchoring bars in supporting beams.

Note - Note the special difficulty induced by bent-up bars in the beam steel:
a) Curtailed bars going to the back of a beam may drift out of position during casting of concrete.
b) Hairpin type bars should be related to the horizontal stirrup spacing, and this may cause difficulties.
c) Loops of $270^{\circ}$ are difficult to bend and place in position.
9.5.2.2 Cantilever at the top of beams Where the weathering course is 30 mm or less, crank the bars at a slope not exceeding 1 in 6 [see Fig. 9.9(A)]. Ensure that the combination of top bars and stirrups is such as to provide the required restraint. Note that if a bar is laced over and under the beam bars, it is fully restrained provided that the beam top bars are heavy enough and a stirrup is within 50 mm of such bar. If the bar is not so laced, detail the steel to ensure the anchorage against bursting (see Fig. 9.9).


Fig. 9.3 Slab Spanning in Two Directions-Arrangement of Strips and Direction of Reinforcement

9.4A Corner with Two Discontinuous Ends
9.4B Corner with One Discontinuous Ends

Fig. 9.4 Torsional Reinforcement in Slabs


Fig. 9.5 Simplified Rules for Curtailment of Bars-Section Through Middle Strip


Fig. 9.6 Additional Reinforcement at Reentrant Corners
9.5.3 Cantilevers Around Corners - Ensure that, in a corner of a cantilever slab, the detailing is such that tie-back loading and the deflections that arise from this are accounted for. Avoid 'fan' type detailing. Take particular care with drainage inlets.
9.6 Openings in Slab:-Special detailing for openings for lift shafts, large service ducts, etc, in the floors shall be given in the drawing. Such openings shall be strengthened by special beams or additional reinforcement around the openings. Due regard shall be paid to the possibility of diagonal cracks developing at the corners of the openings.

Note - The number, size and position of trimming bars is a function of the design, and should be determined by the designer.
9.6.1 Where openings are small and the slab is not subjected to any special type loading or vibration conditions, the following general detailing rules may be followed around openings (see Fig. 9.10 and 9.11):
a) At least one half the quantity of principal steel intersected by the opening is to be placed parallel to principal steel on each side of the opening extending $L_{\mathrm{d}}$ beyond the edges of the opening.
b) Diagonal stitching bars are put across the corners of rectangular holes or so placed as
to frame circular openings. They should be placed both at top and bottom if the thickness of slab exceeds 150 mm . The diameter of these bars should be the same as that of the larger of the slab bars, and their length should be about 80 diameters.
Note - In general openings of diameter less than 250 mm or of size smaller than $200 \times 200 \mathrm{~mm}$ may be treated as insignificant openings.

### 9.7 Slabs with Welded Wire Fabric

9.7.1 General - Welded wire fabric is either oblong mesh or square mesh and is supplied in either rolls or flat sheets. The details regarding material, types and designation, dimensions, sizes of sheets or rolls, weight, tolerance, mechanical properties, etc, are all covered in IS: 1566-1982 'Specification for hard-drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement (second revision)' (see also Section 1).

### 9.7.2 Detailing

9.7.2.1 To ensure that correct size of fabric is laid in right direction, small sketches should be inserted on the plan to indicate the direction of span of the fabric. Details at A and B in Fig. 9.12 indicate square and oblong welded wire fabric, respectively, in plan view of slab.
9.7.2.2 The actual position of the welded wire fabric sheet in slab panels may be shown by a diagonal line together with the description of the mesh used. Bottom sheets should be shown with diagonal drawn from bottom left-hand corner to the top right-hand corner. Top sheets should be shown from top left-hand corner to the bottom right-hand corner. A schedule may also be included in the structural drawing indicating the mesh sizes, length and width, and cutting details for welded wire fabric sheets for different slabs panels. A typical plan is illustrated in Fig. 9.13 (see Section 5 for schedule).

### 9.8 Flat Slabs

9.8.1 General - The term flat slab means a reinforced concrete slab with or without drops, supported generally without beams, by columns with or without flared column heads (see Fig. 9.14). A flat slab may be solid slab or may have recesses formed on the soffit so that the soffit comprises a series of ribs (waffles) in two directions. The recesses may be formed by removable or permanent filler blocks.

### 9.8.1.1 (see Fig. 9.15)

a) Column strip-Column strip means a design strip having a width of $0.25 l_{2}$, but not greater than $0.25 l_{1}$ on each side of the column centre line, where $l_{1}$ is the span in the direction moments are being determined, measured centre-to-centre of supports and $l_{2}$ is the span transverse to $l_{1}$, measured centre-to-centre of supports.

9.7A CANTILEVER SLAB CONTINUOUS OVER A BRICK WALL
$\qquad$


Note - Bottom bars left out for clarity
Fig. 9.8 Cantilever Slabs at the Bottom of Beams

Note - Bottom bars left out for clarity
Fig. 9.9 Cantilever at the Top of Beams

Fig. 9.10 Additional Reinforcement Around a Rectangular a Opening in a Slab

Fig. 9.11 Additional Reinforcement Around a Circulor Opening in a Slab

Fig. 9.12 Welded Wire Fabric in Plan View of Slab.


Fig. 9.13 Plan Showing Typical Details of Welded Wire Fabric


Note - De is the diameter of column or column head to be considered for design and $d$ is effective depth of slab or drop as appropriate.

Fig. 9.14 Critical sections for Shear in Flat Slabs
b) Middle strip - Middle strip means a design strip bounded on each of its opposite sides by the column strip.
c) Panel - Panel means that part of a slab bounded on each of its four sides by the centre line of a column or centre line of adjacent spans.

### 9.8.2 Proportioning

9.8.2.1 The minimum thickness of slab shall be 125 mm .
9.8.2.2 Drops - The drops, when provided, shall be rectangular in plan and have a length in each direction not less than one-third of the panel length in that direction. For exterior panels, the width of drops at right angles to the noncontinuous edge and measured from the centre line of the columns shall be equal to one-half the width of drop for interior panels.
9.8.2.3 Column heads - Where column heads are provided, that portion of a column head which lies within the largest right circular cone or pyramid that has a vertex angle of $90^{\circ}$ and can be included entirely within the outlines of the column and the column head, shall be considered for design purposes (see 9.13).

### 9.8.3 Slab Reinforcement

9.8.3.1 Spacing - The spacing of bars in a flat slab shall not exceed twice the slab thickness, except where a slab is of cellular or ribbed construction.
9.8.3.2 Area of reinforcement - When drop panels are used, the thickness of drop panel for determination of area of reinforcement shall be the lesser of the following:
a) Thickness of drop, and
b) Thickness of slab plus one-quarter the distance between edge of drop and edge of capital.

### 9.8.3.3 Minimum length of reinforcement

a) Reinforcement in flat slabs shall have the minimum lengths specified in Fig. 9.16. Larger lengths of reinforcement shall be provided when required by analysis.
b) Where adjacent spans are unequal, the extension of negative reinforcement beyond each face of the common column shall be based on the longer span.


Fig. 9.15 Panels, Column Strips and Middle Strips

### 9.8.3.4 Anchoring reinforcement

a) All slab reinforcement perpendicular to a discontinuous edge shall have an anchorage (straight, bent or otherwise anchored) past the internal face of the spandrel beam, wall or column of an amount:

1) for positive reinforcement - not less than 15 cm except that with fabric reinforcement having a fully welded transverse wire directly over the support, it shall be permissible to reduce this length to one-half of the width of the support or 5 cm , whichever is greater; and
2) for negative reinforcement - such that the design stress is developed at the internal face, in accordance with Section 4.
b) Where the slab is not supported by a spandrel beam or wall, or where the slab cantilevers beyond the support, the anchorage shall be obtained within the slab.
9.8.3.5 When the design is based on the direct design method specified in IS : 456-1978, simplified detailing rules as specified in Fig. 9.17 may be followed. A typical arrangement of bars in a flat slab with drop panels is shown in Fig. 9.17.
9.8.4 Openings in Flat Slabs - Openings of any size may be provided in the flat slab if it is shown by analysis that the requirements of strength and serviceability are met. However, for openings conforming to the following, no special analysis is required (see also 9.6):
a) Openings of any size may be placed within the middle half of the span in each direction, provided the total amount of reinforcement required for the panel without the opening is maintained.
b) In the area common to two column strips, not more than one-eighth of the width of strip in either span shall be interrupted by the openings. The equivalent of reinforcement


Bent bars at exterior supports may be used if a general analysis is made.
Note - $D_{10}$ the diameter of the column and the dimension of the rectangular column in the direction under consideration.

Fig. 9.16


# SECTION THROUGH MIDDLE STRIP 

Fig. 9.17 Typical Arrangement of Bars in a Flat Slab with Drop Panels
handbook on concrete reinforcement and detailing

interrupted shall be added on all sides of the openings.
c) In the area common to one column strip and one middle strip, not more than one-quarter of the reinforcement in either strip shall be interrupted by the openings. The equivalent of reinforcement interrupted shall be added on all sides of the openings.
9.8.5 Shear Reinforcement at Column Heads and Dropped Panels - The best method of providing shear reinforcement for slabs at column heads is to use beam cages in one direction and bars in the other direction laid under and on top of the steel in the cages (see Fig. 9.18). Other methods such as the following may also be used depending upon their suitability:
a) Half or open stirrups suspended from the top steel;
b) Use of serpentine bars (see Fig. 9.19A).
c) Spiders made of bent bars (for deep slabs) (see Fig. 9.19B).
d) Structural steel frames made of plate.

A few more methods of detailing shear reinforcement in flat slabs are given in Fig. 9.20 to 9.22 .

### 9.9 Waffle Slabs

9.9.1 Definition - A waffle flat slab is a twoway joist system. The two-way joist portion may be combined with a solid column head or with solid wide beam sections on the column centre lines for uniform depth construction.
9.9.2 Size of Waffles - Re-usable forms of standard size shall be used for economy. These shall provide the width of rib at least 10 cm and spaced not more than 100 cm clear, and depth not more than $31 / 2$ times the minimum width. Standard size may be adopted for these moulds as $50 \times 50 \mathrm{~cm}, 60 \times 60 \mathrm{~cm}, 80 \times 80 \mathrm{~cm}$, and $100 \times$ 100 cm and depth as $15,20,25,30,35,40,45$, and 50 cm .
9.9.3 Detailing of Reinforcement in the Waffle Slab (With Solid Head and Square Interior Panel) - Ensure that at least 50 percent of the total main tension steel in the ribs is carried through at the bottom on to the support and anchored (see Fig. 9.23).