by beams from all four sides. The amount of transverse reinforcement in this case may be reduced to half the value. The tie reinforcement at beam-column joints may be provided by U -
shaped ites (hair pin type), the length of the legs beyond the columns being kept is dictated by bond requirements so as to develop full strength of the tie (see Section 7).

Fig. 12.5 Spacing of Shear Reinforcement in Columns

# SECTION 13 

Transport, Storage, Fabrication, Assembly and
Placing of Steel Reinforcement

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 13 

## TRANSPORT, STORAGE, FABRICATION, ASSEMBLY AND PLACING OF STEEL REINFORCEMENT

### 13.1 Transport and Storage

13.1.1 Transport - This clause only concerns the transport of unshaped reinforcement. Reinforcement is to be protected during loading, unloading and transport. The following shall be avoided:
a) Accidental damage or notches causing a decrease in section.
b) Contact with other products liable to deteriorate or to weaken the bonding of the reinforcement.
c) Any permanent bends in the reinforcement, straightening being unadvisable.
d) Removal of any anti-corrosive protection present.
Care should be taken not to destroy the marking or labelling of the products. In order to facilitate any subsequent handling (unloading, distribution in the stock), batches of identical reinforcement should be grouped during transport.
13.1.1.1 Transport between the supplier and the consumer - Transport is generally by road. Wherever possible good accessibility to bundles of reinforcement should be maintained to allow rapid handling (separation timbers, slings). Unloading should be carried out mechanically wherever possible.
13.1.1.2 Transport on the fabrication area - The operation is generally expensive. However, rationalization and industrialization may lead to greater mass production which allows better use of mechanical lifting methods and reduces reliance on manual transport. Transport between various shaping machines may be carried out on tables fitted with rollers; these tables may be mobile and thus serve several production lines. Transport by lifting necessitates the use of a hoist fitted with several attachments for holding the bundle and preventing any permanent deformation in the reinforcement.
13.1.2 Storage - During storage, the reinforcement elements should be carefully indexed and classified according to their diameter, type, grades, length and batch of origin.

When the design of ribs or the distribution of the marking allows easy identification even for cut lengths, accidental substitution is not frequent; on the other hand, there is danger of confusion for plain reinforcement without markings or with
markings which are not repeated. It is thus necessary to use the entire length of the reinforcement or the cut reinforcement bearing the distinctive mark last of all. The cleanness of the steel without stains, such as grease, oil, paint, earth, non-adherent rust or any other substance which is harmful to its good preservation and bonding is important. The whole of protective coating, if any, shall be protected during storage and steel-fixing. When the reinforcement is removed from store, the surface state should be examined to ensure that the steel has not undergone any harmful deterioration. If the design engineer considers it necessary, the manufacturer (or the fabricator) shall carry out quality control tests.

This examination should be all the more detailed the longer the storage period, the more severe the environmental conditions, and higher the grade of steel.

Both on site (as far as possible) and in the works, a sufficient storge area should be provided to facilitate handling to prevent any error or confusion.

The storage area shall provide free access for the arrival of unbent reinforcement and be close to the measuring tables and other bending equipment. When a fabrication post is set up on site, but mainly during the design of larger reinforced units, any handling which is not strictly necessary shall be avoided wherever possible. As commercial lengths are large, any rotation of the reinforcement in a horizontal plane shall be excluded. This is possible when the reinforcement is stored in alignment or parallel to the measuring tables and the cutting tables.
13.2 Cutting - The reinforcement is cut in accordance with the cutting schedules. Cutting is carried out with the aid of shears power-operated or otherwise taking care not to damage the ribs in the neighbourhood of the sheared section.

Flame cutting and electrode cutting is not advised for reinforcement other than that in mild steel. It may alter the properties of heat-treated steel over a small length (a few diameters).

The cut lengths are generally measured on a measuring table; this ensures that flatness and straightness of the reinforcement are checked during measuring and the tolerances are complied with more easily.

For repetitive series, that is generally in factories, measuring tables are fitted with detachable stops, fixed in advance by the operator to obtain the desired lengths for several reinforcing bars simultaneously. Reinforcement on these measuring benches is transported by means of rollers, in some cases power-driven or by winches.

Tolerances on cut lengths depend on the tolerances for:
a) the concrete cover to the reinforcement,
b) the position of the reinforcement, and
c) the structural element (shuttering).

Other tolerances may be imposed by special conditions:
a) orthogonality of the sheared section in relation to the axis of the reinforce. ment (flash welding, sleeve splice), and
b) absence of burns (sleeve splice).

Depending on the criteria of use, one may prefer one piece of cutting equipment to another (cutting by shears, cutting by power saw, etc).

### 13.3 Fabrication

13.3.1 General-Fabrication involves shaping of the reinforcement elements, that is, bending and radiusing (that is, bending with a large radius of curvature).

Fabrication is carried out in accordance with the schedules. The schedules shall be followed as strictly as possible; in fact, straightening is always hazardous, systematic rebending should, therefore, be avoided. It is advisable, if the bending has to be corrected in-situ, for this operation to be carried out by accentuating the bending rather than by straightening.

During fabrication, consideration shall be given to the fact that due to the elastic return of a bent bar, the real angle may (as function of the grade and diameter) be greater than the angle of rotation of the plate. The operator should therefore, overbend.

The minimum diameter of the mandrel shall be at least equal to the minimum diameter of the bending-rebending test specified in the Agreement, and shall be selected so as to avoid crushing or splitting of the concrete under the effect of the pressure which is exerted inside the curve.

For anchor hooks at the ends of the longitudinal bars, the minimum diameter of the mandrel shall never be less than $5 \phi$. The fabricator shall ensure the quality of bending (absence of cracks, etc) by a visual examination.

In general, tolerances are not fixed on bending angles; on the other hand, it is important that the
overall dimensions of the fabricated reinforcement conform to the plan (correct placing, sufficient concrete cover, etc).

The bending speed depends on the nature of the steels and the ambinet temperature: it shall be the subject of a preliminary experimental determination if it is not fixed in the Agreement or by the regulations.

Bending and radiusing, which are similar operations, are carried out cold. The use of a torch to facilitate this operation is generally prohibited, since it can, for example, alter the mechanical properties of cold worked steel.

Fabrication, even when mechanized, requires many operations: its relative importance in the overall cost of reinforcement is high. Rationalization of these operations and use to the greatest possible extent of rectilinear reinforcement are essential in order to reduce the overall cost.
13.3.2 Equipment - Bending of bars may be done either by improvised means or by handoperated machines (see Fig. 13.1, 13.2 and 13.3) and by power-operated bender. For bars of 12 mm diameter and under, mechanical contrivances of the type illustrated in Fig. 13.1 may be advantageously employed.
13.3.2.1 Two of the most common types of bar-bending machines suitable for bending bars cold are shown in Fig. 13.2 and 13.3. The essential components of the machines are also illustrated in the figures. The hand machine shown in Fig. 13.2 could be employed for bending bars up to 16 mm diameter and for larger diameters geared bar bender shown in Fig. 13.3 is required. Special roller spindles may be necessary for bending deformed and twisted bars.
13.3.2.2 Bending of bars of 36 mm diameter anc larger require special equipment, such as

Fig. 13.1 Bending of Bar by Means of Claw


Fig. 13.2 Simple Bar-Bending. Machine

Fig. 13.3 Geared Bar-Bending Machine
power-operated benders. However, where only a few bars are to be bent, easy bends may be formed by jimcrow or rail bender, an appliance comprising forged bow with a steel square threaded screw.
13.3.2.3 Where large quantities of bars are to be bent, power-operated benders may be advantageously used.
13.3.2.4 Operation - The hand-operated benders are generally mounted on tables. Various operations involved and the schematic way of bending are illustrated in Fig. 13.4. The bar to be bent should be placed between two stops driven into a steel or wooden table. The bar should be held rigid at one of the stops by a roller sitting over the mandrel. By using a tommy bar and levering, the bar may be bent to the desired angle.
13.3.2.5 Special patented appliances for bending bars into helical, rectangular and other shapes are available and they may also be used.
13.3.3 Bending and Cutting Tolerances Where an overall or an internal dimension of the bent bar is specified, the tolerance, unless otherwise stated, should be as follows:

| Dimension |  | Tolerance |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | cm | mm |
| For bent bars | $\leqslant 75$ | $+3$ |
|  |  | $-5$ |
|  | $>75 \leqslant 150$ | $+5$ |
|  |  | $-10$ |
|  | $>150 \leqslant 250$ | $+6$ |
|  |  | $-15$ |
|  | $>250$ | $+7$ |
|  |  | $-25$ |
| For straight bars | All lengths | $+25$ |
|  |  | $-25$ |

13.3.3.1 Any excess in length of bar supplied over the total of lengths of the various portions of the bar between bends, including the specified tolerances or not, shall be taken up in the end anchorages, or in that portion of the bar which shall be indicated on the schedule. The cutting lengths shall be specified to the next greater whole 25 mm of the sum of the bending dimensions and allowance.


CENTRE OF BAR TO START OF BEND

Fig. 13.4 Bending of Bar
13.3.3.2 The cutting tolerance for bars to be bent shall be the tolerance given for straight bars. To allow for this cutting tolerance when dimensioning bent bars, at least one dimension shall not be specified.

### 13.4 Assembly and Placing of the Reinforcement Elements

13.4.1 General - This section covers the partial or total (flat or spatial) assembly, in accordance with the reinforcement drawings, of the reinforcement elements. This assembly may be carried out:
a) at the works,
b) at the fabrication location on site, and
c) at the immediate position of the component, that is:

1) in the shuttering,
2) above the shuttering, and
3) outside the shuttering.

If assembly is not carried out at the spot where it is to be positioned, the accuracy of the assembly shall be closely monitored. Depending on the assembly point and subsequent handling, various precautions have to be observed:
a) conformity to the schedules, respect of tolerances imposed, respect of spacing, cover and lapping of the bars;
b) invariability of the position of the bars, rigidity of the whole; and
c) possibility of placing and compacting the concrete (with a vibrating poker in many cases).

These problems shall be taken into account from the design stage onwards.

These conditions can be satisfied by wellthought out design and careful assembly.

For assembly outside the shuttering, the fixer uses gauges, trestles and special temporary wooden supports (or steel in the works). These

devices can sometimes consists of auxiliary reinforcing bars which do not play a part in carrying stresses. The placing of these bars shall conform to the various regulations concerning the concrete cover, distance between bars, etc.

In addition some auxiliary bars are, if necessary, planned to prevent large deformations in the reinforced and assembled structures. Handling of prefabricated reinforcement requires some care: any accidental displacement of a bar or any permanent deformation should be avoided.

In some cases, and in particular for large reinforced structures, hoisting equipment is fitted with a spreader bar hooked in several places to the element to be positioned (see Fig. 13.5). Assembly may involve cases where only partial assembly can be carried out since the weight to be lifted and/or the accessibility of the shuttering and the possibility of making satisfactory joints inside the formwork act as limits.

1. Bridle 2. Spreader Bar 3. Hooks

Fig. 13.5 Hoisting Equipment

The various assembly operations shall take account of the presence of elements such as recesses and service pipes and conduits, etc, embedded in the concrete of the structural element.

Prefabricated reinforcement is fixed with ties, couplers, welds or carefully arranged supports, of suitable solidity and in sufficient number so that they can be neither displaced nor deformed during placing of the concrete or during transport and placing of the reinforcement structure when it is assembled outside the shuttering.

The cost of reinforcement may be broken down as follows:

Production costs (cutting, bending, transport, assembly and fixing) may vary depending on the product, preparation, design of the reinforcement, from 4 to 5 manhours per tonne to 150 manhours per tonne.

## Examples

Reinforcement of a Beam or Column (Outside the Shuttering).

Cut and bent bars are stored nearby, sorted and collected into bundles and labelled (these have been produced either on site, or delivered cut and bent by a reinforcement factory).

The fixer puts longitudinal bars on chair supports (minimum 2 chairs). The position for stirrups is measured and marked off. Each stirrup by being moved slightly apart is introduced around the bars. Angle bars are tied with a double knot to the main upper bars. By separating slightly either the chair, or the bars, the lower bars are brought down; these are held by the stirrups. The necessary intersections are tied up. In some cases, dowel bars are introduced at the ends of the cage. Removal of the whole after labelling (if not to be used immediately).

## Reinforcement of a Slab :

- marking off in chalk the distances between axes;
- placing of the main bars;
- placing of the secondary reinforcement;
- tying of intersections;
- placing of the spacers for the lower bed;
- placing of spacers between two layers;
- placing of the distribution reinforcement on the spacers, and other secondary reinforcement on the lower bed;
- placing of the main reinforcement; and
- lifting of the secondary reinforcement and tying.
Reinforcement of a Wall - In general, the wall remains accessible from at least one side: reinforcement starts on the other:
- fixing of vertical bars to the dowel bars and the spacers;
- positioning and tying of horizontal bars;
- positioning of the horizontal dowel bars for the front bed;
- fixing of vertical bars and tying in horizontal bars lifted as needed; and
- placing of spacers between the two vertical layers.
Assembly of Prefabricated ReinforcementApart from the problem of deformability during transport and handling, assembly is carried out in the same way as above, but at the works. Fixing is carried out by welding or tying. Units are limited by the lifting capacity available on site and the maximum dimensions authorised for the means of transport anticipated.

The reinforcement factory decides on the method of jointing reinforcement structures

(independent bars to be drawn from the cages, welding or mechanical coupling methods, etc).
13.4.2 Fixing - As regards assembly on site, bars which touch while crossing are fixed generally by very tight annealed wire ties of 1 to 2 mm , or sometimes by some special device.
13.4.2.1 Tying-Tying may, in order of increasing resistance to slipping, be by means of a:

- single or snap tie (see Fig. 13.6)
- saddle ties
- figure of eight tie

Fig. 13.6
Recourse to stronger ties may enable the number of nodes tied to be limited. It is, in any event, recommended that the direction of single knots be alternated so as to increase the rigidity of the mesh (see Fig. 13.7).

Fig. 13.7 Alternated Tying
The need to tie a certain percentage of the nodes depends not only on the type of tie used, but also on the diameter of the bars, their surface shape (smooth or notched) and the rigidity which one wishes to give to the reinforcement (handling, transport, etc).

Tying wire is delivered in small coils.
Pieces of wire with two eyelets are also used, tied with the aid of special pliers with a hook. This method is faster with an unskilled workforce (see Fig. 13.8).

With skilled fixers tying is the best method of jointing on site.

Fig. 13.8 Prefabricated Fixing Wire

The bottom of the shuttering must be cleared of any wire waste before concreting to prevent it causing rust stains and corrosion paths on the surface from which the shuttering is to be removed. For this purpose a magnet suspended at the end of a chain which is taken along the bottom of the shuttering, or even a jet of compressed air, may be used.
13.4.3 Placing the Reinforcement - Correct placing of reinforcement requires proper maintainance of the distances between bars, and concrete cover, that is, the exact placing of the reinforcement in accordance with the drawings.

This is, in general, achieved by using spacers to ensure that the reinforcement is kept in the position allocated in the design, resisting the actions to which it is subjected during placing. The parts of spacers in contact with the shuttering shall resist corrosion and shall not affect the appearance of the concrete when the shuttering is removed. When the concrete has hardened they shall not cause cracking or infiltration of water, which causes corrosion.
13.4.3.1 Distance between parallel reinforcement elements:
a) Between horizontal layers - The distance between these layers is often ensured by means of a bar (say 12 mm diameter) bent as shown in Fig. 13.9.

Fig. 13.9 Layer Spacers

This high chair, which is easy to make on site, is fixed to the main reinforcement and is never in direct contact with the shuttering.

Prefabricated devices such as those indicated in Fig. 13.10 are also used, either for isolated bars (bar chairs), or for heavy layers (continuous chairs and bolsters).
b) Between vertical layers - The distance between vertical layers of reinforcement (see Fig. 13.11) is usually ensured by means of straight bars, hooked bars or bars bent into, a $U$, tied to the main reinforcement.

13.10A FOR ISOLATED BARS (HIGH CHAIRS)
13.10B FOR HEAVY LAYERS (CONTINUÑUS CHAIRS)

Fig. 13.10 Chairs

Fig. 13.11 Spacers for Vertical Layers
Fixing by a straight bar can never be correctly ensured.

Hooked bars do not prevent vertical layers from moving closer together, therefore, tying is necessary.

Bars bent into a $U$ may be easily and correctly tied to the main reinforcement and is the best solution.

There are metal devices ensuring simultaneously correct spacing of the vertical bars (fixing by gripping) the cover required and the distance between the walls of the shuttering. Plastic caps are fitted to prevent corrosion of the metal piece on the surface of the concrete (see Fig. 13.12).

Fig. 13.12 Spacers for Reinforcement and Shuttering
c) In beams and columns - In beams, columns and other elements the main bars, which are parallel, are connected by tying to the stirrups in order to form a rigid cage.
13.4.4 Fixing Reinforcement in Relation to the Shuttering - It is essential to maintain the distance between the reinforcement and the shuttering indicated on the drawing.

This is necessary to provide a uniform concrete cover to the reinforcement so as to protect it from corrosion.
13.4.4.1 Horizontal shuttering - In the case of horizontal shuttering, the device used must be able to support the following without risk of piercing the shuttering:

- the weight of the reinforcement;
- supplementary loads resulting from the placing of the concrets;
- supplementary loads due to movement of workers over the reinforcement network.

In foundation pads, the layer of reinforcement is placed on mortar or concrete blocks or on strips of mortar cast in place between two joists. These supports themselves rest either on blinding concrete (general case) or directly on the ground (see Fig. 13.13).

Fig. 13.13 Strip of Mortar Cast on the Shuttering (or on The Ground)

The mortar should, of course, have hardened sufficiently before the reinforcement is place.

The disadvantages attributed to this system arise from the haste in placing reinforcement structures which are often very heavy on mortar which is too fresh and which is then likely to break.

At the bottom of the shuttering, continuous metallic supports are also used, the feet of which are sometimes fitted with plastic caps to prevent rust stains on visible surfaces, or continous supports entirely in plastic. The latter model presents the disadvantage of not guaranteeing correct filling of the lower part by the concrete (see Fig. 13.14).

Fig. 13.14 Continuous Supports for Layers of REINFORCEMENT

For layers of reinforcement for reinforced concrete road surfaces in the USA, bent ribbed sheet-metal supports placed directly on the ground are very widely used.

There is a very wide variety of individual supports which may, for greater ease, be classified according to the constitutent material:
a) Mortar supports (see Fig. 13.15)-The blocks of mortar are most often produced on the site. The trend is, however, towards an increasing use of prefabricated pieces, the shape of which is sometimes more suitable and the composition more homogeneous. The blocks often have a tying wire in mild annealed steel or in galvanised steel, or a wire with two eyelets.
The area of contact with the shuttering may be reduced by giving a hemispherical or cylindrical shape to the block. In this case adequate cover of the block is not always ensured if the concrete used is very dry or has undergone little vibration.

Fig. 13.15 Types of Mortar Block Support

The blocks or wedges of mortar are visible after the shuttering has been removed if their composition is different from that of the concrete in the structure and if their porosity is likely to cause absorption of the oil used for removal of the shuttering.

Bonding to the concrete is always well assured, and no cracking is noted where the block of mortar is located.

Rings of mortar through which the reinforcement is threaded are relatively fragile; they can break when the reinforcement is put in place in the shuttering.
Note - Mortar blocks as spacer blocks should not be permitted on the faces in contact with the liquid in case of reservoirs and tanks.
b) Asbestos-cement supports (Fig. 13.16)There are different forms, with or without tying wire, which limit the area of contact with the shuttering.

The mechanical strength is at least as good as that of blocks of mortar; they are less fragile and bond well with the concrete.

Fig. 13.16 Types of Asbestos-Cement SUPPORTS
c) Plastic supports - These are of two types; (see Fig. 13.17).
a) Supports of the 'chair' type on which the bar is generally simply placed, sometimes gripped. They look like a cradle resting on a cylindrical base or with components which are either parallel or crossed (cruciform contact with the shuttering).

Supports of this type can generally support heavy loads. They do on the other hand have the disadvantage of presenting a large area of contact with the shuttering; some models have cavities, the complete filling of which with concrete may create problem.
b) Supports of the 'circular' type which are fixed to the reinforcement by gripping. They are generally weaker and may give way under the weight of heavy reinforcement.

They are certainly more suitable for vertical reinforcement than for horizontal reinforcement. The support must be designed to allow good anchoring in the concrete while not constituting too large a discontinuity in the section passing through its plane.


Fig. 13.17 Plastic Supports

Contact with the shuttering is limited to the ends of the spokes or a very limited portion of rim.
13.4.4.2 Vertical shuttering - Here the role of the spacer is basically to maintain the desired distance between the reinforcement and the wall of the shuttering; the spacer does not have to bear large loads.

It must, on the ofher hand, be correctly fixed to the reinforcement so that it does not move under its own weight (vertical reinforcement), or at the moment of concreting (fall of concrete, vibration, etc).

This fixing is carried out either by binding (mortar or asbestos cement blocks) or by the very elasticity of the material (plastic spacers fixed by gripping). The types listed in 13.4.4.1 may, in general, be suitable on condition that they are fixed correctly to the reinforcement.

In columns, in particular, it is better not to use the circular type spacers on the vertical
reinforcement, since they constitute obstructions when concreting; it is preferable to place them on the horizontal reinforcement.
13.4.4.3 Upper reinforcement in slabs The upper network of reinforcement in slabs or floors usually rests on the lower network by means of chairs (see Fig. 13.18).

The reinforcement network sometimes rests on the bottom of the shuttering by means of high blocks of mortar or concrete (up to 15 to 20 cm high) which are in the form of a pyramid or a truncated cone.

High metal chairs, individual or continuous, are also used and sometimes fitted with plastic caps.
13.4.5 Factors Determining the Choice of a System - Table 13.1 presents the factors governing the choice of reinforcement supports.

When two figures are given for a single characteristic, each concerns a support variant or


Fig. 13.18 High Metallic Chairs
a different method. It is necessary in this case to refer to the corresponding comments.

It is obvious that some criteria may be essential, for example, fire resistance, and that the use of
the table shall be altered accordingly.
It is advisable to avoid the use of supports, specially mortar supports which are left behind on the inner face of water retaining structures.

TABLE 13.1 THE CHOICE OF A SUPPORT

# SECTION 14 

Typical Structural Drawings

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 14 

## TYPICAL STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS

14.1 Some examples of structural drawings (see pages 243-280) giving details of structural elements-footings, columns, beams, slabs, etc, are included. These are included for the purpose of illustration only; they are not intended as recommendations for design although they generally meet the requirements of IS : 456-1978. These drawings are intended to emphasize how design information is represented on structural engineering drawings. Specific locations of cut off points, bends, amounts of steel, etc, are shown as examples to convey necessary information through the drawings. These are not to be considered as standard methods of detailing for a specific structure.

The above drawings are based on the drawings
of different projects from different organisations* and each one gives only a part of the information relating to each structure/project. These drawings have been modified, wherever necessary, more or less to suit the requirements of the Handbook. Details of minor nature (as were relevant to the situation) have also been deleted for the purpose of this Handbook.
*BIS acknowledges with thanks the following organizations who were helpful in providing the basic drawings on the basis of which the present drawings have been included:

1. National Industrial Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi;
2. Engineering Consultants (India), New Delhi;
3. Central Public Works Department (CDO), New Delhi; and
4. Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi.

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# APPENDIX A 

(Clause 4.4)

## WELDING

A-0 GENERAL - Welded joints are permitted in reinforcement (mild steel and deformed bars) subject to the condition that in all cases of important connections, tests shall be done to prove that the joints are of the full strength of bars connected.

## A-1 WELDING OF MILD STEEL PLAIN AND HOT ROLLED DEFORMED BARS

A-1.0 The requirements for welding mild steel round and deformed bars conforming to mild steel, Grade I, conforming to IS : 432(Part 1)1982 'Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part I Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars (third revision)' and hot rolled deformed bars conforming to IS : 17861985 'Specification for high strength deformed steel bars and wires for concrete reinforcement (third revision)' are given in IS : 2751-1979 'Code of practice for welding of mild steel plain and deformed bars for reinforced concrete construction (first revision)'.

Note 1 - Hot rolled deformed bars/wires conforming to IS : 1786-1985 will have their transverse and longitudinal ribs in straight lengths.

Note 2 - For guaranteed weldability, the percentage of carbon shall be restricted to 0.25 percent, maximum.

## A-1.1 Electrodes and Filler Rods

A-1.1.1 Electordes - Covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding shall conform to IS : 814 (Part 1)-1974 'Specification for covered electrodes for metal arc welding of structural steel: Part 1 For welding products other than sheets (fourth revision)' and IS : 814 (Part 2)1974 'Specification for covered electrodes for metal arc welding of structural steel: Part 2 For welding sheets (fourth revision)'.
A-1.1.2 Filler Rods - Mild steel filler rods for oxy-acetylene welding shall conform to type S-FS7 of IS : 1278-1972 'Specification for filler rods and wires for gas welding (second revision)' provided they are fapable of giving a minimum butt weld tensile strength of 410 MPa .

A-1.1.3 Mixtures for thermit welding shall be capable of yielding weld metal of the required composition and the tensile strength shall be at least 410 MPa .
A-1.2 Flash Butt Welding - Electric flash butt welding may be adopted if a number of welds have to be done at the same place and when the electric supply is available of the required capacity in respect of the cross-sectional area of the maximum size of bar to be welded.

A-1.2.1 Preparation for Welding - The ends of the bars to be welded shall be sheared off so that fresh steel surfaces are available for welding. The surfaces of the ends of the bars to be clamped shall be cleaned free from rust to enable free flow of electricity in the bars.

A-1.2.2 Procedure - The procedure for flash butt welding shall generally be in accordance with the 'Indian Standard Recommended Procedure for Flash Butt Welding' (under print).

A-1.2.2.1 The ends of the bars to be welded are placed in proper alignment in the clamps so that bend or eccentric joints do not result. The clamps should be cleaned before each welding operation to avoid current losses and also to eliminate harmful notches or grooves due to burning in of spots of arcing.

A-1.2.2.2 Welding should be done without any preheating of bars. The bar ends shall be uniformly pushed against each other from the moment of contact up to the upsetting. The transformer regulator should be so set that the current at the contact area is between 85 and $90 \mathrm{~A} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

A-1.2.2.3 If the butt welding machine or the available power is not sufficient to take the load for welding the bar in the cold condition, welding may be done after preheating. By repeated making and breaking of the contact arc, heat can be made to spread over the entire cross-section of the bar. The number of short circuits (contacts and reversing) should be kept to the minimum possible so that the welding time and spread of heat in the longitudinal directions in the bar is minimum. Satisfactory joints with only slight reduction in the original strength of the bar can be achieved with current densities up to $25 \mathrm{~A} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

A-1.2.2.4 In automatic machines, the flash rate should be so set that a continuous flash without interruption can be achieved. If too high a rate is set, then additional short circuits are required leading to a heat spreading. If the rate is too low, the flash will be interrupted, consequently air penetrating into the joint will form oxides. If the machine is hand operated, the flash should be maintained to avoid interruption.

A-1.2.2.5 Burn-off length - For bars with sheared ends a burn-off (flash-off) length of about 10 mm is required, this length being practically independent of the bar diameter. Very short burnoff length leads to defective welding because all the impurities will not have been removed from the place of welding. Increase in the burn-off

length of the bar thus reducing the strength of the bar.

A-1.2.2.6 Upsetting - The upsetting should result from the burning off, that is, without interruption in the rain of sparks. The electric supply should be switched off about $1 / 3$ to 1 second after the start of the upsetting or in the case of automatic machine, after 1 to 3 minutes of upset travel.

The voltage and frequency of the current should be checked before commencing the welding operation. Such deviations from the nominal value or large fluctuations during the operation may lead to gross defects in the welding. Wherever possible, welding should be done in periods of the day when the total load on the network is fairly balanced.

A-1.3 Fusion Welding of Mild Steel Bars Steel bars shall be either butt welded or lap
welded using any of the following fusion welding processes:
a) Manual metal-arc welding,
b) Oxy-acetylene welding,
c) Gas pressure welding, and
d) Thermit welding.

Thermit welding shall be generally in accordance with the 'Recommended practice for fusion welding of ferrous metal by aluminothermic process' (under print).

A-1.3.1 Butt Welding of Mild Steel Bars Bars may be spliced by butt welding them directly or through a splice number such as angle, sleeve, bars, etc.

A-1.3.1.1 The preparation of edges for different types of butt welds shall be in accordance with Table A-1.

TABLE A-1 EDGE PREPARATION FOR MANUAL METAL ARC WELDING
(Clause A-1.3.1.1)

| St. <br> No. | Detail | Type of Joint | Symbolic <br> Representation | Size <br> RANGE | Application |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) |
|  |  |  |  | 20 to <br> 25 mm | Where the root is accessible for backchipping and application of a sealing run. |
|  | $\begin{aligned} & \text { 2 } \\ & \text { 1 } \\ & \text { 1 } \\ & \text { 1 } \end{aligned}$ | $\begin{aligned} & 0 \text { TO } 1.5 \mathrm{~mm} \\ & 0 \text { TO } 1.5 \mathrm{~mm} \end{aligned}$ |  | Smaller bar 20 to 25 mm welded to larger bar | Where the root is accessible for backchipping and application of a sealing run. |
|  |  |  |  | 20 to <br> 50 mm | Where access to the root of the weld is unobtainable. Alternatively a removable copper backing bar may be used in place of the integral steel backing shown. |
|  |  |  |  | 25 to <br> 50 mm | For general use; Horizontal bars should be turned for flat position welding, wherever possible. |
|  |  |  |  | 40 to <br> 50 mm | Where access to the root of the weld is unobtainable. |

(Continued)

TABLE A-1 EDGE PREPARATION FOR MANUAL METAL ARC WELDING (Contd.)
(Clause A-3.1.1.1)

A-1.3.1.2 The edges shall be prepared by shearing, machining or oxy-acetylene flame cutting. Bevelling may be done by chipping, machining grinding/or oxygen cutting. The joint faces and the surfounding portion of the bars shall be free from scale, dirt, grease, paint, rust and contaminants.

A-1.3.1.3 When it is not possible to rotate the bars for welding in flat position, the axis of the bars shall be horizontal and the respective axes of welds shall be vertical, that is, welds being carried out in the vertical position.

A-1.3.1.4 In the case of inclined bars, the edge preparation shall be such that welding is done only on sides (see Fig. A-1).

A-1.3.1.5 All the bars to be welded should be aligned and set up in position with their axes in one straight line. The joints may not be out of alignment by more than 25 percent of the thickness of the thinner material for material up to and including 12 mm thick, or by more than 3 mm for thicker material. Alignment may be accomplished in a jig, or by means of a clamp or by using guides. Rotation of the bars should be avoided until they are adequately welded, so that no disturbance to the alignment is caused and no twist is introduced in the bars during the process of welding.

A-1.3.1.6 In the case of details 4, 6, 7, 8 and 10 of Table A-1, back chipping in the root is


Fig. A-1 Edge Preparation of Inclined Bars
recommended before welding is commenced on second side. The root run and one further run should be deposited on the first side. Where possible the back chipping and root run on the second side should then follow and the remaining runs should preferably be deposited on alternate sides of the joint to assist in controlling distortion.

A-1.3.1.7 Indirect butt splices may be made by welding bars to splice plate, angle, sleeve, etc. using single or double fillet welds as shown in Fig. A-2. The splice member used, that is, plate, angle, bar, sleeve, etc. should have a crosssectional area such that its strength is at least 5 percent higher than the strength of the bars being welded. The bars shall not be eccentric by more than 3 percent of the bars joined. The angles when used may be flattened to suit for welding higher size bars.

## A-1.3.2 Lap Welding of Mild Steel Bars

A-1.3.2.1 Edge preparation is not necessary for lap welds. The length of bars to be welded should be free from scale, dirt, grease, paint, rust and contaminants.

A-1.3.2.2 The bars may be lap welded using the details given in Fig. A-3. Detail given in Fig. A-3(A) is used when the bars are in contact with each others. If the bars are bent, the maximum gap shall be 6 mm .

When the gap between bars is more than 6 mm the joint should be made using a splice bar or plate [see Fig. A-3 (A)]. The gap between the bar and splice plate should not exceed 0.25 times the diameter of the bar or 5 mm , whichever is less. The area of the splice material shall be at least 5 percent more than the area of the higher size bar being welded.

Some information regarding throat thickness and reinforcement is given in Table A-2.

A-1.3.2.3 The dimensions of the fillet welds (length and throat thickness) shall be capable of developing the full strength of the bar. The

TABLE A-2 DETAILS FOR LAP WELDED JOINTS
(Clause A-1.3.2.2)

| Bar Diameter | Throat <br> Thickness | Gap <br> between <br> Reinforcement <br> (Approx) |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | Min |  |
| (1) | (2) | (3) |
| mm | mm | mm |
| Up to 12 | 3 | 1.5 |
| Over 12 up to 16 | 3 | 3 |
| Over 16 | 5 | 3 |

Note 1 If any overhead weld is required, it should be made prior to the flat welds.

Note 2 - If the bars are bent, the maximum gap should not exceed 6 mm .
eccentricity in the joint should be taken into consideration in the design calculations.

A-1.3.3 Square Butt Welds - Square butt welds may be used for direct butt welding and shall be made using hydrogen controlled electrodes or the thermit welding process.

## A-1.4 Selection of Welded Joints

A-1.4.1 Direct butt splices (Table A-1) and, as a second choice indirect butt splices (see Fig. A-1), should be specified for bars of diameter 20 mm and over in order to reduce effects of eccentricity.

A-1.4.2 For bars of diameter up to 20 mm indirect splicing (see Fig. A-1) may be used although lap welds are normally adopted for such bars.

A-1.4.3 Square Butt Welds - The bars may be directly jointed with square butt welds provided the welds are made using hydrogen controlled electrodes or thermit welding process.

A-1.5 Location of Welded Joints - Welded joints should be staggered in the length of the


A-2A INDIRECT BUTT SPLICE USING A PLATE

A-2B INDIRECT BUTT SPLICE USING AN ANGLE

A-2C INDIRECT BUTT SPLICE USING A SLEEVE

A-2D INDIRECT BUTT SPLICE USING TWO BARS
Fig. A-2 Indirect Butt Splices


A-3A LAP WELDING BARS IN CONTACT

A-3B LAP WELDING BARS WITH BARS SEPARATED BY A DISTANCE

Fig A-3 Lap Welding of Mild Steel Bars
reinforced concrete components. The joints should also not be positioned in highly stressed areas.

## A-1.6 Quality Control Tests

A-1.6.1 Butt Welds - Test pieces containing butt welds at the centre in the 'as welded' condition shall be selected at the rate of one for tensile test and one for nick break test for every 500 joints.

A-1.6.1.1 Tensile test - The selected pieces, when subjected to a tensile test, shall have a tensile strength not less than 410 MPa ( $42 \mathrm{kgf} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ ).

A-1.6.1.2 Nick break test - The test specimen shall be notched as given in Fig. A-4 and shall be broken open along the weld, the fractured surface visually examined for fusion, root penetration, gas cavities and quality of weld metal. The surface should be reasonably free from cavities, inclusions, etc. There shall be no lack of fusion. Small porosity may, however, be permitted.

A-1.6.1.3 Bend test - The specimen shall be bent using any suitable jig. The weld joint should be capable of being bent to an angle of $60^{\circ}$ around a mandrel of diameter equal to diameter of bar before any crack appears.

A-1.6.2 Lap Joints - Test pieces containing lap joints at their centre shall be selected at the rate of 1 per 500 joints.

A-1.6.2.1 Tensile test - The load required to shear the joint shall be at least equal to the tensile load required to fracture the bar.

Note - When pulling lap weld specimens to determine the tensile strength a jig should be used to prevent distortion due to secondary stresses. The jig may be of design and detail preferred by the testing agency but should prevent change in geometry of the specimen as it is being pulled.

A-1.7 Retests - If a sample selected for testing fails to meet the requirements given under A-1.6.1 or A-1.6.2, the purchaser or his representative shall select two further samples from the same lot. If on testing, either of the samples fails to meet the specified requirements, the whole lot shall be rejected.

A-1.8 Inspection - For purpose of inspection reference shall be made to IS : 822-1970 'Code of procedure for inspection of welds'.

A-1.8.1 The weld size, length and location shall be as stipulated in the drawings, and the metal designated shall be free from cracks, excessive slag inclusions and excessive porosity.

A-1.8.2 The weld metal shall be properly fused with the parent metal without overlapping at the toes of the weld.

A-1.8.3 There shall be no cracks in the heat affected zones of the reinforcing bars or splice members

A-1.8.4 There shall be no serious undercuts in joint subjected to tension.

A-1.8.5 All craters shall be filled to the crosssection of the welds.

A-1.8.6 The visible surfaces of all welds shall be free from entrapped slag and shall be regular and of consistently uniform contour.


Fig. A-4 Nick Break Test Specimens.

A-1.8.7 All direct butt welds shall be of full cross-section with maximum reinforcement of 3 mm and shall blend smoothly into the face of bars.

A-1.8.8 The profile of fillet welds shall be substantially flat or slightly convex.

## A-2 WELDING OF COLD-WORKED STEEL BARS

A-2.0 The recommendation for welding coldworked steel bars conforming to IS : 1786-1985 is given in IS : 9417-1979.

Note 1 - Cold-work deformed bars conforming to IS : 1786-1985 will have their longitudinal and transverse ribs twisted and not in straight lines.

Note 2 - For guaranteed weldability, the percentage of carbon shall be restricted to 0.25 percent, maximum.

A-2.1 Electrodes - Electrodes used shall conform to IS: 814(Part 1)-1974 and IS : 814(Part 2)-1974 .

A-2.2 Procedure - Cold-worked steel bars shall be either butt-welded or lap-welded. Butt-welding may be carried out either by resistance butt or flash butt or by manual metal arc welding process.
A.2.2.1 Resistance Butt Welding and Flash Butt Welding of Cold-Worked Bars - Flash or resistance butt welding may be adopted if a large number of welding has to be done at the same place and when the electric supply is available of the required capacity in respect of the crosssectional area of the maximum size of bar to be welded.

A-2.2.1.1 Preparation for welding - The ends of the bars and the extreme untwisted ends of new bar shall be sheared off so that fresh steel surfaces are available for welding. the surfaces of the ends of the bars to be clamped shall be cleaned free from rust to unable free flow of current in the bars.

A-2.2.1.2 Procedure - The ends of the bars to be welded are placed in proper alignment in the clamps so that bent or eccentric joints do not result. The clamps should be cleaned before each welding operation to avoid current loss and to eliminate harmful notches or grooves due to burning in of spots of arcing.

The bar ends shall be uniformly pushed against each other from the moment of contact up to the upsetting. The transformer regulator should be
so set that the current at the contact area is between 85 and $90 \mathrm{~A} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

If the capacity of butt welding machine or the available power is not sufficient to take the load for welding from cold, welding may be done after preheating. By making and breaking of the contact arc repeatedly, heat can be made to spread over the entire cross-sections of the bars. The number of -short-circuits (contacts and reversing) should be kept to the minimum possible so that the welding time and spread of heat in the longitudinal direction in the bar is minimum. Satisfactory joints with only slight reduction in the original strength of the bar can be achieved with a current densities up to $25 \mathrm{~A} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$.

In automatic machines the flash rate should be so set that a continuous flash without interruption can be achieved. If too high a rate is set, then additional short-circuits are required leading to a heat spreading. If the rate is too low, the flash will be interrupted, consequently air penetrating into the joint will form oxides. If the machine is handoperated, the flash should be maintained to avoid interruption. Too long flashes lead to generation of large quantities of heat thus removing the effect of cold-working in the bar.

Burn-off length - For bars with sheared ends, a burn-off (flash-off) length of about 5 to 7 mm is required, this length being practically independent of the bar diameter. Very short burn-off lengths lead to defective welding because all the impurities will not have been removed from the place of welding. Increase in the burn-off length will spread heat along the length of the bar thus reducing the strength of the bar.

Upsetting - The upsetting should result from the burning off, that is, without interruption in the rain of sparks. The electric supply should be switched off about $1 / 3$ to 1 second after the start of the upsetting or in the case of automatic machine after 1 to 3 mm of upset travel.

The voltage and frequency of the current should be checked before commencing the welding operation. Such deviations from the nominal value or large fluctuations during the welding. Wherever possible, welding should be welding. Wherever possible welding should be done in periods of the day when the total load on the network is fairly balanced.

A-2.2.2 Butt-Welding by Metal-Arc Welding Process - Butt-welds are normally adopted to

join bars of thickness more than 20 mm . Welding electrodes with flux covering of Type 3 or 6 (see IS : 815-1974'Classification and coding of covered electrodes for metal arc silding of structural steel (second revision) are recommended for better results depending on the size of bar to be welded.

## A-2.2.2.1 Preparation for welding

The preparation of the edges of the rods shall be as shown in Fig. A-5. The edges shall be prepared by shearing, machining or oxy-acetylene flame cutting. Bevelling may be made by machining, grinding or oxy-acetylene cutting. The fusion faces and the surrounding material shall be free from scale, dirt, grease, paint, rust and contaminants.

When it is not possible to rotate the bars for welding in flat position, the axis of the bars shall be horizontal and the respective welding shall be vertical, that is, the welds being carried out in the vertical position.

In the case of non-rotatable inclined bars, the edge preparation shall be such that welding is done only on sides (see Fig. A-5).

All the bars to be butt welded should be aligned and set up in position with their axis in one straight line. This may be done in a jig or by means of a clamp or by using guides. Rotation of the bars should be avoided until they are adequately welded, so that no disturbance to the alignment is caused and no twist is introduced in the bars during the process of welding. The joints
may not be out of alignment by more than 25 percent of the thickness of the thinner material up to and including 12 mm thick, or by more than 3 mm or thicker material.

A-2.2.2.2 Electrodes - The electrodes shall be so selected that relatively short beads can be rapidly made, since with each bead only a small quantity of heat is transferred to the steel which the steel can conduct away without any harmful effects on the material. If the electrodes move out slowly, a concentration of heat takes place thus removing the effects of cold-working on the bar.

The size of electrode depends upon the length of the bead and thickness of the bar to be welded. The root runs should be made with electrodes of size 3.15 mm . With the number of beads the size of electrode should be gradually increased from 3.15 to a maximum size of 5 mm for the top bead.

A-2.2.2.3 Welding procedure and technique - The sequence of welding beads is shown in Fig. A-6 for information. The runs 1 to 4 are made in the position of welding best suited for the quality of the weld. Besides the interruption in welding required for cleaning of each bead, a pause shall be made after every second bead and the bar is allowed to cool down. The temperature of the bars at a distance of about 20 mm from the joint shall not exceed $300^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ immediately after the bead is made. Before commencing the next bead, the temperature shall not exceed $250^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. The temperatures can be checked approximately using temperature indicating crayons.

Fig. A-5 Edge Preparation of Inclined Bars

Fig. A-6 Sequence of Welding Beads

After completing the bead 4, the bars are rotated by $180^{\circ}$ about their axes, and the beads 5 to 8 are made in a manner described above. The final bead 9 is made in the case of horizontal and freely rotatable bars by weaving in the direction of the bar periphery, the bars being continuously rotated during welding.

In the case of vertical, inclined and nonrotatable bars the beads 1 to 4 shall be made as explained in this clause. The top bead is made by making separate annular runs (see Fig. A-7), the electrode being drawn up to the edge of the top bead. The starting and withdrawal position of the electrodes are shown in Fig. A-7. The top beads are made by drawing the adjacent beads in the longitudinal direction of the bar. The diameter measured over the top of the butt welded joint shall be equal to at least 1.2 times the diameter of the bar.

A-2.2.3 Lap Welding of Cold-Worked Bars Lap joints may be made in bars of all sizes and qualities of cold-worked bars. They are preferred when access for welding is from only one side and while connecting prefabricated units. Use of electrodes with flux covering of type 3 or 6 are recommended for better results depending on the size of bar being welded.

A-2.2.3.1 Edge preparation is not necessary for lap welds. The joint faces and the surrounding material shall be free from scale, dirt, grease, paint, rust and contaminants.

A-2.2.3.2 Electrodes - The size of electrodes according to the diameter of the bar to be welded shall be as follows:

| Size of Bar | Size of |
| :-- | :-- |
| mm | Electrode, |
|  | Min |
| Up to and including 6 | mm |
| Over 6 up to and including 10 | 1.6 |
| Over 10 up to and including 14 | 2.0 |
| Over 14 up to and including 20 | 2.5 |
| Over 20 | 3.15 |

A-2.2.3.3 Procedure - The arc should be struck as shown in Fig. A-8 somewhere in the middle of the joint and not at its beginning.

The movement of the electrode for welding lap joints in the horizontal and vertical position is indicated in Fig. A-8.

In Fig. A-9 to A-12 are given the various lap joints used to connect cold-worked bars.

## A-2.3 Quality Control Tests

A-2.3.1 Butt Welds - Test pieces containing butt welds at the centre in the as welding condition shall be selected at the rate of one for tensile test and one for bend test for every 500 joints.

A-2.3.1.1 Tensile test - The selected pieces, when subjected to a tensile test, shall have a tensile strength not less than 90 percent of the actual tensile strength of the bar but in no case less than the tensile strength of the bar specified in IS : 1786-1985. The fracture shall take place away from the weld.

A-2.3.1.2 Bend test - The welded joint should be capable of being bent to an angle of $60^{\circ}$ around a mandrel of diameter equal to diameter of bar before any crack appears.

A-2.3.2 Lap Joints - The pieces containing lap joints at their centre shall be selected at the rate of one in 500 joints.

A-2.3.2.1 Tensile test - The load required to shear the lap joint shall be at least equal to the tensile load required to fracture the bar.

A-2.4 Retests - If a sample selected for testing fails to meet the requirements given under A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2, the purchaser or his representative shall take two further samples from the same lot. If on testing either of the samples fails to meet the specified requirements, the whole lot shall be rejected.

Fig. A-7 Making of Top Bead


A-8A WELDING IN THE HORIZONTAL POSITION
A-8B WELDING IN THE VERTICAL POSITION
Fig. A-8 Welding of Lap Joints

1 Strike the arc with the electrode; the arc striking point should lie in the gap which is finally welded.
2 Welding dislocation.
3 Electrode withdrawal.
4 Bar to be spliced.

Fig. A-9 Lap Joint Using Stages

Fig. A-10 Lap Joint


Fig. A-11 I.ap Joint

Fig. A-12 Lap Joint

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# APPENDIX B 

(Clause 5.9.1)

## ISO 4066-1977 BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING DRAWINGS-BAR SCHEDULING*

## B-0. INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this International Standard is to ensure uniformity of practice in the scheduling of steel bars for the reinforcement of concrete. To establish a clear and unambiguous system for scheduling, it is necessary to specify the method of indicating dimensions to be used and the order in which the information is given on the bar schedule.

As the use of preferred shapes is considered to be very advantageous both for simplifying design and manufacture and for the use of computers, the opportunity has been taken to include a list of preferred shapes and a coding system; the layout of the bar schedule is based on the use of preferred shapes.

## B-1. SCOPE

This International Standard establishes a system for the scheduling of reinforcing bars, and comprises

- the method of indicating dimensions;
- a coding system for bar shapes;
- a list of preferred shapes;
- the bar schedule.


## B-2. FIELD OF APPLICATION

This International Standard applies to all types of steel bar for the reinforcement of concrete.
Steel fabric and prestressing steel reinforcement are excluded.

## B-3. METHODS OF INDICATING BENDING DIMENSIONS

The bending dimensions shall be indicated as shown in Fig. B-1 t $\boldsymbol{\text { B-5. }}$

Dimensions shall be outside dimensions except for radii and the standard radius of bend shall be the smallest radius permitted by national standards or regulations.

The total length (cutting length) shall be calculated on the basis of the appropriate bending dimensions with corrections for bends and allowances for anchorages.

[^0]
## B-4. CODING SYSTEM FOR BAR SHAPES

The shape code number consists of two or, if essential, three or four characters, as defined in Table B-1.

## B-5. LIST OF PREFERRED SHAPES

When a third character is used, the direction of the end anchorages shall be as shown by the dotted lines in the examples in Table B-2.

It is recognized that in some countries hooks are used for end anchorages.

The letter symbols refer to the dimensions which shall be given in the bar schedule.

## B-6. BAR SCHEDULE

The bar schedule is the document used to specify and identify reinforcing bars. The format specified below incorporates the use of preferred shapes.

## B-6.1 Information content

A bar schedule shall contain the following information in the sequence listed below:
a) member - identification of the structural member in which the bar is located;
b) bar mark - unique reference of the bar;
c) type of steel;
d) diameter of bar;
e) length of each bar (cutting length, allowing for loss or gain at bends, calculated from the dimensions and radii given in (k); see B-3);
f) number of members;
g) number of bars in each member;
h) total number of bars $[(f) \times(g)]$;
j) total length $[(\mathrm{e}) \times(\mathrm{h})]$
k) shape code (as defined in B-5);
m) bending dimensions;
n) revision letter;
p) title block.

An example of a form of bar schedule is shown on page 236 .


[^0]:    *This ISO standard is reproduced here in full as a supplement to the information contained in this handbook.

c : number of complete turns

## B-6.2 Special shapes

When special shapes are required, these shall be shown by a dimensioned sketch drawn in the space normally used for bending dimensions.

## B-6.3 Title Block

The title block shall be placed below the schedule, and shall contain the following information:
a) name of the structural designer;
b) title of the project;
c) date prepared prepared by ... checked by ...
d) drawing number;
e) bar schedule reference;
f) revision letter and date of last revision; and
g) a statement that the schedule has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of ISO 4066.

## B-7. SUMMARY SHEET

If required, summary sheets may be used; separate sheets shall be used for each type of steel.

TABLE B-1 CODE NUMBER COMPOSITION

| First Character | Second Character | Third Character | Fourth Character |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| 0 - No bends (optional) <br> $1-1$ bend <br> $2-2$ bends <br> $3-3$ bends <br> $4-4$ bends <br> $5-5$ bends <br> 6 - Arcs of circles <br> 7 - Helices | 0 - Straight bars (optional) <br> $1-90^{\circ}$ bend(s) of standard radius all bent in the same direction <br> $2-90^{\circ}$ bend(s) of nonstandard radius, all bent in the same direction <br> $3-180^{\circ}$ bend(s) of nonstandard radius, all bent in the same direction <br> $4-90^{\circ}$ bends of standard radius not all bent in the same direction <br> 5 - Bends $<90^{\circ}$, all bent in the same direction <br> 6 - Bends $<90^{\circ}$, not all bent in the same direction <br> 7 - Arcs or helices | 0 - No end anchorage (optional) <br> 1 - End anchorage at one end, as defined in national standards <br> 2 - End anchorages at both ends, as defined in national standards | 5 - Where a national standard specifies a special radius of bend (for example stirrups, links) this shall be indicated by use of the character $S$. |

Note - The table explains the logic behind the numbering of the shapes in Table B-2. It is not to be used for making up codes for additional shapes.


## DIMENSIONS AND PROPERTIES OF HARD DRAWN STEEL WIRE FABRIC AND OTHER BARS

TABLE C-1 DIMENSIONS AND PROPERTIES OF HARD-DRAWN STEEL WIRE FABRIC (SQUARE AND OBLONG MESH)

| $\begin{aligned} & \text { Sl. } \\ & \text { No. } \end{aligned}$ | Mesh Size (Nominal Pitch of Wires) | Diameter of Wire Each Way | Nominal Weight | Sl. <br> No. | Mesh Size (Nominal Pitch of Wires) | Diameter of Wire Each Way | Nominal Weight |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) |
|  | mm | mm | $\mathrm{kg} / \mathrm{m}^{2}$ |  | mm | mm | $\mathrm{kg} / \mathrm{m}^{2}$ |
| A. Sqare Mesh |  |  |  |  | main cross | main cross |  |
| 1 | 50 | 3.0 | 2.220 | 55 | 75. | 5.3 | 2.580 |
| 2 | 50 | 3.8 | 3.560 | 56 | 75 | 5.6 | 2.83 |
| 3 | 50 | 3.0 | 6.160 | 57 | 75 | 5.8 | 3.040 |
| 4 | 100 | 3.4 | 1.430 | 58 | 75 | 6.5 | 3.470 |
| 5 | 100 | 3.6 | 1.600 | 59 | 75 | 6.0 | 3.80 |
| 6 | 100 | 4.0 | 1.980 | 60 | 75 | 6.5 | 4.260 |
| 7 | 100 | 4.5 | 2.530 | 61 | 75 | 7.0 | 4.360 |
| 8 | 100 | 4.8 | 2.840 | 62 | 75 | 8.0 | 5.730 |
| 9 | 100 | 5.0 | 3.080 | 63 | 75 | 9.0 | 7.130 |
| 10 | 100 | 5.3 | 3.460 | 64 | 75 | 10.0 | 8.910 |
| 11 | 100 | 5.8 | 4.140 | 65 | 75 | 9.0 | 7.00 |
| 12 | 100 | 6.5 | 5.200 | 66 | 75 | 9.5 | 7.90 |
| 13 | 100 | 7.0 | 6.040 | 67 | 75 | 10.0 | 8.71 |
| 14 | 100 | 8.0 | 7.900 | 68 | 75 | 8.0 | 5.60 |
| 15 | 150 | 3.15 | 0.82 | 69 | 75 | 7.5 | 4.75 |
| 16 | 150 | 3.6 | 1.060 | 70 | 75 | 7.1 | 4.46 |
| 17 | 150 | 4.0 | 1.320 | 71 | 75 | 6.3 | 3.50 |
| 18 | 150 | 4.5 | 1.660 | 72 | 100 | 4.2 | 1.460 |
| 19 | 150 | 4.75 | 1.85 | 73 | 100 | 4.5 | 1.620 |
| 20 | 150 | 5.0 | 2.060 | 74 | 100 | 4.6 | 1.670 |
| 21 | 150 | 5.3 | 2.300 | 75 | 100 | 4.8 | 1.950 |
| 22 | 150 | 5.6 | 2.57 | 76 | 100 | 5.0 | 1.910 |
| 23 | 150 | 5.8 | 2.760 | 77 | 100 | 5.3 | 2.260 |
| 24 | 150 | 6.0 | 2.360 | 78 | 100 | 5.5 | 2.240 |
| 25 | 150 | 6.3 | 3.27 | 79 | 100 | 5.8 | 2.600 |
| 26 | 150 | 6.5 | 3.480 | 80 | 100 | 6.5 | 3.260 |
| 27 | 150 | 7.1 | 4.14 | 81 | 100 | 7.0 | 3.680 |
| 28 | 150 | 7.5 | 4.62 | 82 | 100 | 4.2 | 1.530 |
| 29 | 150 | 8.0 | 5.260 | 83 | 100 | 5.0 | 1.960 |
| 30 | 150 | 9.0 | 6.660 | 84 | 100 | 5.5 | 2.300 |
| 31 | 150 | 10.0 | 8.220 | 85 | 100 | 7.0 | 3.640 |
| 32 | 200 | 4.0 | 0.980 | 86 | 100 | 4.0 | 1.180 |
| 33 | 200 | 4.5 | 1.260 | 87 | 100 | 4.2 | 1.640 |
| 34 | 200 | 4.8 | 1.420 | 88 | 100 | 4.5 | 1.440 |
| 35 | 200 | 5.3 | 1.740 | 89 | 100 | 4.2 | 1.450 |
| 36 | 200 | 5.8 | 2.080 | 90 | 100 | 4.8 | 1.680 |
| 37 | 200 | 6.5 | 2.600 | 91 | 100 | 5.0 | 2.100 |
| 38 | 200 | 7.0 | 3.020 | 92 | 100 | 4.0 | 1.900 |
| 39 | 200 | 8.0 | 3.940 | 93 | 100 | 5.0 | 1.730 |
| 40 | 200 | 9.0 | 5.300 | 94 | 100 | 5.3 | 2.000 |
| 41 | 200 | 10.0 | 6.160 | 95 | 100 | 5.8 | 2.340 |
| B. Oblong Mesh |  |  |  | 96 | 100 | 6.0 | 2.730 |
|  |  |  |  | 97 | 100 | 6.5 | 2.930 |
|  | main | $\begin{aligned} & \text { cross } \\ & \text { mass } \end{aligned}$ | main cross |  | 98 | 7.0 | 3.350 |
| 42 | 75 | 250 | 5.0 | 2.490 | 100 | 7.0 | 3.530 |
| 43 | 75 | 250 | 4.2 | 1.09 | 101 | 7.5 | 3.640 |
| 44 | 75 | 250 | 6.0 | 3.580 | 102 | 7.5 | 4.210 |
| 45 | 75 | 300 | 3.15 | 0.96 | 103 | 8.0 | 4.420 |
| 46 | 75 | 300 | 3.55 | 1.18 | 104 | 8.0 | 4.690 |
| 47 | 75 | 300 | 4.0 | 1.45 | 105 | 8.0 | 4.480 |
| 48 | 75 | 300 | 4.0 | 1.510 | 106 | 9.0 | 5.560 |
| 49 | 75 | 300 | 4.5 | 1.870 | 107 | 5.0 | 6.660 |
| 50 | 75 | 300 | 4.7 | 2.06 | 108 | 5.0 | 1.440 |
| 51 | 75 | 300 | 4.8 | 2.160 | 109 | 6.5 | 3.300 |
| 52 | 75 | 300 | 5.0 | 2.420 | 110 | 6.0 | 2.070 |
| 53 | 75 | 300 | 5.0 | 2.600 | 111 | 7.0 | 2.520 |
| 54 | 75 | 300 | 5.3 | 3.15 | 112 | 8.0 | 3.490 |

TABLE C-2 REINFORCEMENT CHARACTERISTICS-AREA, WEIGHT AND PERIMETER

| Size | Area | Weight | Peri- <br> METER | Lenotif <br> Per Tonne | Size | Area | Weight | Peri- <br> METER | Lenotif <br> PER TONNE |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) |
| mm | $\left(\mathrm{cm}^{2}\right)$ | $(\mathrm{kg} / \mathrm{m})$ | $(\mathrm{cm})$ | (m) | mm | $\left(\mathrm{cm}^{2}\right)$ | $(\mathrm{kg} / \mathrm{m})$ | (cm) | (m) |
| 6 | 0.283 | 0.222 | 1.89 | 4310 | 22 | 3.801 | 2.980 | 6.91 | 336 |
| 8 | 0.503 | 0.395 | 2.51 | 2332 | 25 | 4.909 | 3.854 | 7.85 | 260 |
| 10 | 0.785 | 0.617 | 3.14 | 1621 | 28 | 6.157 | 4.830 | 8.80 | 207 |
| 12 | 1.131 | 0.888 | 5.77 | 1125 | 32 | 8.042 | 6.313 | 10.05 | 159 |
| 14 | 1.539 | 1.206 | 4.40 | 829 | 36 | 10.179 | 7.990 | 11.31 | 125 |
| 16 | 2.011 | 1.578 | 5.03 | 633 | 40 | 12.566 | 9.864 | 12.57 | 101 |
| 18 | 2.545 | 2.000 | 5.65 | 500 | 45 | 15.904 | 12.490 | 14.14 | 80 |
| 20 | 3.142 | 2.466 | 6.28 | 405 | 50 | 19.635 | 15.410 | 15.71 | 65 |

TABLE C-3 AREAS OF GROUPS OF STANDARDS BARS (IN SQUARE CENTIMETRES)

|  NUMBER OF BARS | BAR DIAMETER IN mm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | 6 | 8 | 10 | 12 | 14 | 16 | 18 | 20 | 22 | 25 | 28 | 32 | 36  |
|  1 | 0.28 | 0.50 | 0.79 | 1.13 | 1.54 | 2.01 | 2.54 | 3.14 | 3.80 | 4.91 | 6.16 | 8.04 | 10.18  |
|  2 | 0.56 | 1.00 | 1.57 | 2.26 | 3.07 | 4.02 | 5.08 | 6.28 | 7.60 | 9.81 | 12.31 | 16.08 | 20.35  |
|  3 | 0.84 | 1.50 | 2.35 | 3.39 | 4.61 | 6.03 | 7.63 | 9.42 | 11.40 | 14.72 | 18.47 | 24.12 | 30.53  |
|  4 | 1.13 | 2.01 | 3.14 | 4.52 | 6.15 | 8.04 | 10.17 | 12.56 | 15.20 | 19.63 | 24.63 | 32.17 | 40.71  |
|  5 | 1.41 | 2.51 | 3.92 | 5.65 | 7.69 | 10.05 | 12.72 | 15.70 | 19.00 | 24.54 | 30.18 | 40.21 | 50.89  |
|  6 | 1.69 | 3.01 | 4.71 | 6.78 | 9.23 | 12.06 | 15.26 | 18.85 | 22.80 | 29.45 | 36.94 | 48.25 | 61.07  |
|  7 | 1.97 | 3.51 | 5.49 | 7.91 | 10.77 | 14.07 | 17.81 | 21.99 | 26.60 | 34.36 | 43.10 | 56.29 | 71.25  |
|  8 | 2.26 | 4.02 | 6.28 | 9.04 | 12.31 | 16.08 | 20.35 | 25.13 | 30.41 | 39.27 | 49.26 | 64.34 | 81.43  |
|  9 | 2.54 | 4.52 | 7.06 | 10.17 | 13.85 | 18.09 | 22.90 | 28.27 | 34.21 | 44.17 | 55.41 | 72.33 | 91.60  |
|  10 | 2.82 | 5.02 | 7.85 | 11.31 | 15.39 | 20.10 | 25.44 | 31.41 | 38.01 | 49.08 | 61.57 | 80.42 | 101.78  |
|  11 | 3.11 | 5.52 | 8.63 | 12.44 | 16.93 | 22.11 | 27.99 | 34.55 | 41.81 | 53.99 | 67.75 | 88.46 | 111.96  |
|  12 | 3.39 | 6.03 | 9.42 | 13.57 | 18.47 | 24.12 | 30.53 | 37.69 | 45.61 | 58.90 | 73.89 | 96.51 | 122.14  |
|  13 | 3.67 | 6.53 | 10.21 | 14.70 | 20.01 | 26.13 | 33.08 | 40.84 | 49.41 | 63.81 | 80.04 | 104.55 | 132.32  |
|  14 | 3.95 | 7.03 | 10.99 | 15.83 | 21.55 | 28.14 | 35.62 | 43.98 | 53.21 | 68.72 | 86.20 | 112.59 | 142.50  |
|  15 | 4.24 | 7.54 | 11.78 | 16.96 | 23.09 | 30.15 | 38.17 | 47.12 | 57.02 | 73.63 | 92.36 | 120.63 | 152.68  |
|  16 | 4.52 | 8.04 | 12.56 | 18.09 | 24.63 | 32.17 | 40.71 | 50.26 | 60.82 | 78.54 | 98.52 | 128.68 | 162.86  |
|  17 | 4.80 | 8.54 | 13.35 | 19.22 | 26.17 | 34.18 | 43.26 | 53.40 | 64.62 | 83.44 | 104.67 | 136.72 | 173.03  |
|  18 | 5.08 | 9.04 | 14.13 | 20.35 | 27.70 | 36.19 | 45.80 | 56.54 | 68.42 | 88.35 | 110.83 | 144.76 | 183.21  |
|  19 | 5.37 | 9.55 | 14.92 | 21.48 | 29.24 | 38.20 | 48.34 | 59.69 | 72.22 | 93.26 | 116.99 | 152.80 | 193.39  |
|  20 | 5.65 | 10.05 | 15.70 | 22.62 | 30.78 | 40.21 | 50.89 | 62.83 | 76.02 | 98.17 | 123.15 | 160.85 | 203.57  |

TABLE C-4 PERIMETER OF GROUPS OF STANDARD BARS (IN CENTIMETERS)

| Number <br> of Bar | Bar Diameter in mm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | 6 | 8 | 10 | 12 | 14 | 16 | 18 | 20 | 22 | 25 | 28 | 32 | 36 |
| 1 | 1.88 | 2.51 | 3.14 | 3.77 | 4.40 | 5.03 | 5.65 | 6.28 | 6.91 | 7.85 | 8.80 | 10.05 | 11.31 |
| 2 | 3.77 | 5.02 | 6.28 | 7.54 | 8.79 | 10.05 | 11.31 | 12.56 | 13.82 | 15.70 | 17.59 | 20.10 | 22.62 |
| 3 | 5.65 | 7.54 | 9.42 | 11.31 | 13.19 | 15.08 | 16.96 | 18.85 | 20.73 | 23.56 | 26.38 | 30.15 | 33.92 |
| 4 | 7.54 | 10.05 | 12.56 | 15.08 | 17.59 | 20.10 | 22.62 | 25.13 | 27.64 | 31.41 | 35.18 | 40.21 | 45.23 |
| 5 | 9.42 | 12.56 | 15.70 | 18.85 | 21.99 | 25.13 | 28.27 | 31.41 | 34.55 | 39.27 | 43.98 | 50.26 | 56.54 |
| 6 | 11.31 | 15.08 | 18.85 | 22.62 | 26.38 | 30.15 | 33.92 | 37.69 | 41.46 | 47.12 | 52.77 | 60.31 | 67.85 |
| 7 | 13.19 | 17.59 | 21.99 | 26.38 | 30.78 | 35.18 | 39.58 | 43.98 | 48.38 | 54.97 | 61.57 | 70.37 | 79.16 |
| 8 | 15.08 | 20.10 | 25.13 | 30.15 | 35.18 | 40.21 | 45.23 | 50.26 | 55.29 | 62.83 | 70.37 | 80.42 | 90.47 |
| 9 | 16.96 | 22.62 | 28.27 | 33.92 | 39.58 | 45.23 | 50.89 | 56.54 | 62.20 | 70.68 | 79.16 | 90.47 | 101.78 |
| 10 | 18.85 | 25.13 | 31.41 | 37.69 | 43.98 | 50.26 | 56.54 | 62.83 | 69.11 | 78.54 | 87.96 | 100.53 | 113.09 |
| 11 | 20.73 | 27.64 | 34.55 | 41.46 | 48.38 | 55.29 | 62.20 | 69.11 | 76.02 | 86.39 | 96.75 | 110.59 | 124.40 |
| 12 | 22.62 | 30.15 | 37.69 | 45.23 | 52.77 | 60.31 | 67.85 | 75.39 | 82.93 | 94.24 | 105.55 | 120.63 | 135.71 |
| 13 | 24.50 | 32.67 | 40.84 | 49.00 | 57.17 | 65.34 | 73.51 | 81.68 | 89.85 | 102.10 | 114.35 | 130.69 | 147.02 |
| 14 | 26.38 | 35.18 | 43.98 | 52.77 | 61.57 | 70.37 | 79.16 | 87.96 | 96.76 | 109.95 | 123.15 | 140.74 | 158.33 |
| 15 | 28.27 | 37.69 | 47.12 | 56.54 | 65.97 | 75.39 | 84.82 | 94.24 | 103.67 | 117.81 | 131.94 | 150.79 | 169.64 |
| 16 | 30.15 | 40.21 | 50.26 | 60.31 | 70.37 | 80.42 | 90.47 | 100.53 | 110.58 | 125.66 | 140.74 | 160.85 | 180.95 |
| 17 | 32.04 | 42.72 | 53.40 | 64.08 | 74.77 | 85.45 | 96.13 | 106.81 | 117.49 | 133.51 | 149.54 | 170.90 | 192.26 |
| 18 | 33.92 | 45.23 | 56.54 | 67.95 | 79.16 | 90.47 | 101.78 | 113.09 | 124.40 | 141.37 | 158.33 | 180.95 | 203.57 |
| 19 | 35.81 | 47.75 | 59.69 | 71.62 | 83.56 | 95.50 | 107.44 | 119.38 | 131.31 | 149.22 | 167.13 | 191.00 | 214.88 |
| 20 | 37.69 | 50.26 | 62.83 | 75.39 | 87.96 | 100.53 | 113.09 | 123.66 | 138.23 | 157.08 | 175.93 | 201.06 | 226.19 |

| Spacing <br> cm | TABLE C-5 AREA OF BARS IN SLABS (IN SQUARE CENTIMETRES PER METRE WIDTH) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  | Bar Diameter in mm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | 6 | 8 | 10 | 12 | 14 | 16 | 18 | 20 | 22 | 25 | 28 | 32 |
| 5 | 5.65 | 10.05 | 15.71 | 22.62 | 30.79 | 40.21 | 50.89 | 62.83 | 76.03 | 98.17 | 123.15 | 160.85 |
| 6 | 4.71 | 8.38 | 13.09 | 18.85 | 25.66 | 33.51 | 42.41 | 52.36 | 63.36 | 81.81 | 102.68 | 134.04 |
| 7 | 4.04 | 7.18 | 11.22 | 16.16 | 21.99 | 28.72 | 36.35 | 44.88 | 54.30 | 70.12 | 87.96 | 114.89 |
| 8 | 3.53 | 6.28 | 9.82 | 14.14 | 19.24 | 25.13 | 31.81 | 39.27 | 47.52 | 61.36 | 76.97 | 100.53 |
| 9 | 3.14 | 5.58 | 8.73 | 12.57 | 17.10 | 22.34 | 28.27 | 34.91 | 42.24 | 54.54 | 68.42 | 89.36 |
| 10 | 2.83 | 5.03 | 7.85 | 11.31 | 15.39 | 20.11 | 25.45 | 31.42 | 38.01 | 49.09 | 61.57 | 80.42 |
| 11 | 2.57 | 4.57 | 7.14 | 10.28 | 13.99 | 18.28 | 23.13 | 28.56 | 34.56 | 44.62 | 55.98 | 73.11 |
| 12 | 2.36 | 4.19 | 6.54 | 9.42 | 12.83 | 16.75 | 21.21 | 26.18 | 31.68 | 40.91 | 51.31 | 67.02 |
| 13 | 2.17 | 3.87 | 6.04 | 8.70 | 11.84 | 15.47 | 19.57 | 24.17 | 29.24 | 37.76 | 47.37 | 61.86 |
| 14 | 2.02 | 3.59 | 5.61 | 8.08 | 11.00 | 14.36 | 18.18 | 22.44 | 27.15 | 35.06 | 43.98 | 57.45 |
| 15 | 1.88 | 3.35 | 5.24 | 7.54 | 10.26 | 13.40 | 16.96 | 20.94 | 25.34 | 32.72 | 41.05 | 53.62 |
| 16 | 1.77 | 3.14 | 4.91 | 7.07 | 9.62 | 12.57 | 15.90 | 19.63 | 23.76 | 30.68 | 38.48 | 50.27 |
| 17 | 1.66 | 2.96 | 4.62 | 6.65 | 9.05 | 11.83 | 14.97 | 18.48 | 22.36 | 28.87 | 36.22 | 47.31 |
| 18 | 1.57 | 2.79 | 4.36 | 6.28 | 8.55 | 11.17 | 14.44 | 17.45 | 21.12 | 27.27 | 34.21 | 44.68 |
| 19 | 1.49 | 2.65 | 4.13 | 5.95 | 8.10 | 10.58 | 13.39 | 16.53 | 20.01 | 25.84 | 32.41 | 42.33 |
| 20 | 1.41 | 2.51 | 3.93 | 5.65 | 7.70 | 10.05 | 12.72 | 15.71 | 19.01 | 24.54 | 30.79 | 40.21 |
| 21 | 1.35 | 2.39 | 3.74 | 5.39 | 7.33 | 9.57 | 12.12 | 14.96 | 18.10 | 23.37 | 29.32 | 38.30 |
| 22 | 1.28 | 2.28 | 3.57 | 5.14 | 7.00 | 9.14 | 11.57 | 14.28 | 17.28 | 22.31 | 27.99 | 36.56 |
| 23 | 1.23 | 2.18 | 3.41 | 4.92 | 6.69 | 8.74 | 11.06 | 13.66 | 16.53 | 21.34 | 26.77 | 34.97 |
| 24 | 1.18 | 2.09 | 3.27 | 4.71 | 6.41 | 8.38 | 10.60 | 13.09 | 15.84 | 20.54 | 25.66 | 33.51 |
| 25 | 1.13 | 2.01 | 3.14 | 4.52 | 6.15 | 8.04 | 10.18 | 12.57 | 15.20 | 19.63 | 24.63 | 32.17 |
| 26 | 1.09 | 1.93 | 3.02 | 4.35 | 5.92 | 7.73 | 9.79 | 12.08 | 14.62 | 18.88 | 23.68 | 30.93 |
| 27 | 1.05 | 1.86 | 2.91 | 4.19 | 5.70 | 7.45 | 9.42 | 11.64 | 14.08 | 18.18 | 22.81 | 29.79 |
| 28 | 1.01 | 1.79 | 2.80 | 4.04 | 5.50 | 7.18 | 9.09 | 11.22 | 13.58 | 17.53 | 21.99 | 28.76 |
| 29 | 0.97 | 1.73 | 2.71 | 3.90 | 5.31 | 6.93 | 8.77 | 10.83 | 13.11 | 16.93 | 21.23 | 27.73 |
| 30 | 0.94 | 1.68 | 2.62 | 3.77 | 5.13 | 6.70 | 8.48 | 10.47 | 12.67 | 16.36 | 20.52 | 26.81 |
| 32 | 0.88 | 1.57 | 2.45 | 3.53 | 4.81 | 6.28 | 7.95 | 9.82 | 11.88 | 15.34 | 19.24 | 25.13 |
| 34 | 0.83 | 1.48 | 2.31 | 3.33 | 4.53 | 5.91 | 7.48 | 9.24 | 11.18 | 14.44 | 18.11 | 23.65 |
| 36 | 0.78 | 1.40 | 2.18 | 3.14 | 4.28 | 5.58 | 7.07 | 8.73 | 10.56 | 13.63 | 17.10 | 22.34 |
| 38 | 0.74 | 1.32 | 2.07 | 2.98 | 4.05 | 5.29 | 6.70 | 8.27 | 10.00 | 12.92 | 16.20 | 21.15 |
| 40 | 0.71 | 1.26 | 1.96 | 2.83 | 3.85 | 5.03 | 6.36 | 7.85 | 9.50 | 12.27 | 15.39 | 20.11 |