As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 10 <br> Stairs

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 10 

## STAIRS

10.0 Introduction-Reinforced concrete stairs are self-supporting or carried on beams or walls. They are often built around open or lift wells supported according to the type of structure. Staircase with cantilevering treads from a column or wall support are also commonly used for fire escape stairs, etc.

Note - Minimum steel, bar spacing and cover should conform to the requirements specified for slabs and beams as appropriate.
10.1 Flight Supported on Side Beams - The reinforcement detail for a staircase supported by edge beams along each edge is similar to the one supported along its edges by a brick wall. Figure 10.1 shows cross-sectional details of a flight with two types of arrangements.

Fig. 10.1 Typical Cross-Section of Staircase Supported on Side Beams
10.2 Flight Supported on Central Beann Figure 10.2 shows the cross-sectional detail of a typical staircase supported on a central (stringer) beam. Each step of the staircase is acting as a cantilever on both sides of the main beam.

Fig. 10.2 Typical Cross-Section of a Flight with a Central Beam
10.3 Flights and Landings Supported at EndsFigures 10.3 and 10.4 illustrate two types of stairs with flight and landing supported at ends. Figure 10.3 gives reinforcement details of a flight spanning from outer edge to outer edge of landing. Figure 10.4 gives reinforcement details of a flight together with its landings spanning from inner edge to inner edge of landings.
10.3.1 Flight Supported on Brick WallFigure 10.5 shows the elevation detail for a straight stair flight with its landings at its ends supported by brick walls.
10.4 Cranked Beams - Straight stairflights and landings supported by side or centre beams as shown in Fig. 10.1 to 10.3 will require cranked beams. The elevation details of cranked beam is shown in Fig. 10.6.

The method of reinforcing a cranked beam is shown in Fig. 10.6. The bars at the intersections shall be carried for development length past the intersection, and one set of bars shall be cranked inside the other because of fouling. To complete the intersection extra bars, normal to the angle of intersection, are usually added as shown by the bars $c$ and $f$.
10.5 Cantilever Stairs - A typical details of a tread cantilevering from a wall is given in Fig. 10.7. A typical detail of a staircase cantilevering from the side of a wall is shown in Fig. 10.8.
10.6 Slabless Tread Riser Stairs - A typical detail of a slabless tread riser staircase is given in Fig. 10.9.


Fig. 10.3 Stairs Supported at Ends of Landings-Showing Position of Main Reinforcement


Fig. 10.4 Stairs Supported at Ends of Flights-Showing Main Reinforcement


Fig. 10.5 Cross-Sectional Details of a Single Span Straight Flight SuPPORTID ON Brick Walls

Fig. 10.6 Cranked Beam

- $50 \%$ OF MAIN REINFORCEMENT CAN BE CURTAILED AT A DISTANCE OF 0.5 L OR Ld FROM THE FACE OF SUPPORT

Fig. 10.7 Steps Cantilevering from a Concrete Wall



SECTION $\cdot$ AA

Fig. 10.8 Typical Details of a Stair Case Cantilevering from the Side of a WALL
10.7 Staircases are normally detailed diagrammatically in plan or section. This is best done by arranging the placing detail and bending schedule adjacent to one another on a single drawing sheet (see Fig. 10.10).
10.8 Re-entrant Corners - When tension bars meeting at a corner produce a resultant force resisted by the concrete cover, the bars shall be crossed over and anchored on either side of the cross-over by adequate anchorage length for taking up the stresses in the bar (see Fig. 10.11).
10.9 Hand Rall Supports - The designer should ensure that adequate consideration is given to the reinforcement detailing for hand rail supports. If pockets are left in the concrete into which the hand rail posts are later concreted, the reinforcement shall pass around the pockets and be anchored into the main body of the concrete. If inserts are set into the concrete these should have steel bars passing around them to have sufficient anchorage ties build-in.
10.10 Where construction requires bars larger than \# 10 or $\phi 16$ should not be detailed to be rebend, but mild steel bars are recommended if rebending is unavailable.

FLOOR LVL

ALTERNATIVE-I

ALTERNATIVE-II

Fig. 10.9 Typical Details of a Slabless Tread Riser Staircase


Fig. 10.10 An Example of a Stair with Placing Detail and Bending Schedule


Fig. 10.11 Requirements for Tension Bars Crossing each other at a Point

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 11 

Special Structures-Deep Beams, Walls, Shells and Folded Plates, Water Tanks, RC Hinges, Concrete Pipes, Machine Foundations, and Shear Walls

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 11 

## SPECIAL STRUCTURES - DEEP BEAMS, WALLS, SHELLS AND FOLDED PLATES WATER TANKS, RC HINGES, CONCRETE PIPES, MACHINE FOUNDATIONS, AND SHEAR WALLS

11.1 Deep Beams - A beam shall be deemed to be a deep beam when the ratio of effective span to overall depth $(l / D)$ is less than:
a) 2.0 for simply supported beam, and
b) 2.5 for a continuous beam.

### 11.1.1 Reinforcement

11.1.1.1 Positive reinforcement - The tensile reinforcement required to resist positive bending moment in any span of a deep beam shall:
a) extend without curtailment between supports;
b) be embedded beyond the face of each support so that, at the face of the support, it shall have a development length not less than $0.8 L_{d}$; where $L_{d}$ is the development length for the design stress in the reinforcement (Fig. 11.1);
c) be placed within a zone of depth equal to $(0.25 D-0.05 l)$ adjacent to the tension face of the beam where $D$ is the overall depth and $l$ is the effective span. The arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 11.1.
Note 1 - Ahchorage of positive reinforcement may be achieved by bending of the bars in a horizontal plane (see Fig. 11.1B).

Note 2 - The main reinforcement may be supplemented by two layers of mesh reinforcement provided near each of the two faces; in which case the spacing between two adjacent parallel bars must not exceed twice the thickness of deep beam or 300 mm , whichever is greater.

### 11.1.1.2 Negative reinforcement

a) Termination of reinforcement - For tensile reinforcement required to resist negative bending moment over a support of a deep beam:

1) it shall be permissible to terminate not more than half of the reinforcement at a

Fig. 11.1 Reinforcement Detailing in Simply Supported Deep Beams (Continued)


Fig. 11.1B
Fig. 11.1 Reinforcement Detailing in Simply Supported Deep Beams
distance of $0.5 D$ from the face of the support; and
2) the remainder shall extend over the full span.
b) Distribution steel - When ratio of clear span to overall depth is in the range 1.0 to 2.5 , tensile reinforcement over a support of a deep beam shall be placed in two zones comprising:

1) a zone of depth 0.2 D, adjacent to the tension face, which shall contain a proportion of the tension steel given by

$$
0.5\left(\frac{l}{D}-0.5\right)
$$

where
$l=$ clear span, and
$D=$ overall depth.
2) a zone measuring $0.3 D$ on either side of the mid-depth of the beam, which shall contain the remainder of the tension steel, evenly distributed.

For span to depth ratios less than unity, the steel shall be evenly distributed over a depth of $0.8 D$ measured from the tension face. Figure 11.2 shows the disposition of this reinforcement.
11.1.1.3 Vertical reinforcement - If forces are applied to a deep beam in such a way that hanging action is required, bars or suspension stirrups shall be provided to carry all the forces concerned (see Fig. 11.3A).
11.1.1.4 Side face reinforcement - Side face reinforcement shall comply with requirements of minimum reinforcement for walls.
11.1.1.5 Stirrups for deep beams - To stiffen the legs of stirrups for deep beams against buckling during construction, tie clips to the legs and horizontal bars. Space the clips horizontally at every second or third stirrup, subject to a maximum space of 600 mm , and vertically at alternate intersections of horizontal bars (see Fig. 11.3B).
11.2 Walls - This clause deals with reinforced concrete walls other than retaining walls.

Note - A wall is a vertical structural element whose length exceeds four times its thickness. A wall containing only minimum reinfocement which is not considered in design forms a plain concrete wall.
11.2.1 Walls to Carry Vertical Loads Where reinforced concrete walls are intended to carry vertical loads, they should be designed generally in accordance with the recommendations given for columns. The provisions with regard to transverse reinforcement to restrain the vertical bars against buckling need not be applied to walls in which the vertical bars are not assumed to assist in resisting compression. The minimum reinforcement shall be as specified in 11.2.1.1. The minimum thickness of wall should not be less than 100 mm .
11.2.1.1 Reinforcement - The minimum reinforcement for walls shall be provided as given below:
a) The minimum ratio of vertical reinforcement to gross concrete area shall be 0.004 (irrespective of type and grade of steel).
b) Vertical reinforcement shall be spaced not farther apart than three times the wall thickness or 450 mm , whichever is less.
c) The minimum ratio of horizontal reinforcement to gross concrete area shall be:

1) 0.0020 for deformed bars not larger than 16 mm in diameter and with a characteristic strength of $415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ or greater.
2) 0.0025 for other types of bars.


Fig. 11.2 Disposition of Negative Reinforcement in Continuous Deep Beams
3) 0.0020 for welded wire fabric not larger than 16 mm in diameter.
d) Horizontal reinforcement shall be spaced not farther apart than three times the wall thickness or 450 mm .
e) In case of plain concrete walls (where vertical load is not predominant) quantity of vertical reinforcement given in (a) shall be modified as follows:

1) 0.0012 for deformed bars not larger than 16 mm in diameter and with a characteristic strength of $415 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ or greater.
2) 0.0015 for other types of bars.
3) 0.0012 for welded wire fabric not larger than 16 mm in diameter.
11.2.2 Walls to Resist Moment and Shear Horizontal wall reinforcement may be required


Fig. 11.3A

SECTION
ELEVATION
Fig. 11.3B
Fig. 11.3 Suspended Bars for Deep Beams

by the designer to resist moment, shear or merely changes in length due to temperature or shrinkage. In any case, unless the designer indicates a shrinkage control joint at this point, all the horizontal bars in one or sometimes both faces of a wall should be sufficiently extended past a corner or intersection for development length (see Fig. 11.4). Nevertheless it is necessary for the designer to indicate which, if any, horizontal reinforcement should be extended for full development at intersections and corners of walls and footings. Typical details are shown in Fig. 11.4 for resistance against moment inward, outward, or both with the reinforcement from the appropriate face or faces anchored. Figure 11.5 shows a cross-section through floors and walls indicating general arrangement of reinforcement.
11.2.3 Thin Walls-In case of thin walls, reinforcement has to be detailed in such a way that the concrete can be thoroughly compacted.

For walls of thickness 170 mm or less, where the insertion of a vibrator may lead to difficulties, a single layer of vertical and horizontal bars may be provided at the centre of the wall and an external vibrator may be used (see Fig. 11.6A).
11.2.4 Thick Walls-In case of walls of thickness greater than 170 mm but less than or equal to 220 mm , and also for walls of thickness greater than 220 mm with more than nominal reinforcement, provide two layers of reinforcement in both vertical and horizontal directions, the former being placed on the inside of the latter (see Fig. 11.6B). Clips should be provided to restrain the vertical bars against buckling or displacement during concreting. In walls of thickness greater than 220 mm with nominal reinforcement, horizontal steel may be placed inside the vertical steel to reduce the possibility of the coarse aggregate being 'hung-up' on the horizontal bars (see Fig. 11.6C).

Fig. 11.4 Typical Corner and Intersection Details for Reinforced Concrete Walls


Note - Horizontal bars are placed outside vertical bars
Fig. 11.5 General Cross-Sectional Details of Walls
11.2.4.1 Walls with vertical reinforcement close to or more than 0.4 percent of the plan area of concrete - In heavily reinforced walls (with vertical reinforcement close to 0.4 percent of the plan area of concrete), the following requirements should be satisfied:
a) Ensure that clips are provided for vertical bars at a horizontal spacing not exceeding twice the wall thickness.
b) Vertical bars that are not fully restrained are placed within a centre-to-centre distance of 200 mm .from a bar that is fully restrained.
c) Vertical spacing of clips should not exceed 15 times the diameter of the vertical reinforcement or 300 mm whichever is the lesser.
d) At all splices, the top of each lower bar and the bottom of each upper bar are restrained by means of clips.
e) Preferably clips (alternately reversed) may be used, or alternately, truss-type clips as indicated in Fig. 11.7 may also be used.
11.2.5 Splices at Top of Wall - Whenever a slab is to be cast at the top of a wall, detail the vertical continuity of steel from the walls into the top of the slab as follows:
a) If the diameter of deformed bars is less than or equal to 10 mm , the straight bars can be bent into the slab as shown in Fig. 11.8A.
b) If the diameter of deformed bars is greater than 10 mm , the detais shall be as shown in Fig. 11.8B or 11.8 C .
c) If mild steel bars (any diameter) are used, they can be safely bent into the slab without any damage.


Note - Position of Clips to be Indicated on the Drawing
Fig. 11.6 Vertical Sections for Walls

Fig. 11.7 Truss-Type Clips in Alternate Layers' in a Wall
11.2.6 Walls Constructed by Means of Sliding or Climbing Shuttering - Detailing of walls to be constructed by sliding or climbing shuttering is affected by construction techniques that are often unique to the system involved. These techniques include, for example, the use of jacking rods and spacers, are reliant on casting cycles, have separation problems, and depend upon a variety of factors that require special detailing, and should thus be planned in conjunction with the
contractor. In general, connections to slabs and beams are by means of chases or pockets (or both) as it is not generally feasible to leave splice bars protruding from the walls. Splice bars to be bent out should normally be not larger than \# 10 or $\phi 16$. If heavier splices are required and it is not possible to provide pockets of adequate size, consider the use of mechanical splices or welding.

When sliding shuttering is used for walls, vertical splices should preferably be staggered to ease placing problems and to prevent the displacement of reinforcement during sliding. Placing details should call attention to adequate wiring together of upper and lower reinforcement.
11.3 Retaining Walls - The shape of a retaining wall is a function of various factors including the natural and final ground profiles, the proximity of and relationship to existing and proposed buildings and services, the economics of cut and fill, the properties of the filling material, external and subsurface drainage, and vertical and surcharge loads. As a result there are different types of retaining walls, for example, cantilever walls with $L, T$, and reversed $L$ bases,

11.8 C

Fig. 11,8 Splices at Top of Wall

counterforted walls, crib walls, propped and semipropped walls; each type of retaining wall requiring its own individual reinforcing technique (see Fig. 11.9 to 11.12). However, the same general principles apply to all, the more important of which are as follows:
a) So detail the reinforcement as to keep the placing as simple as possible and to minimize difficulties on site which are often compounded by the conditions under which the work is carried out.
b) So arrange the distribution of reinforcement (which is governed by design) as to allow for adequate continuity and to avoid abrupt termination of steel by the staggering of laps.
c) Carefully control the cover to steel on faces adjacent to earth. This applies especially to faces where concrete is to be cast against excavation, for example in footings where the use of levelling course is recommended.
d) So detail expansion joints in the wall as to ensure that relative movements of continuous sections are minimized by the transfer of shear across joints.
e) Ensure that at joints steel detailing caters for the incorporation of water-bars when required.
f) Note that extra reinforcement may be required to meet additional stresses induced by heavy earth compaction and by shrinkage in the wall against the restraint of such compacted earth especially between counterforts.
g) Provide minimum horizontal reinforcement as per 11.2.1.1 (c) and minimum vertical reinforcement as per 11.2.1.1 (e). The steel (indicated by a dotted line in Fig. 11.9 to 11.11) facilitates the maintenance in position of main bars during concreting.
h) Take account of the reduction of effectiveness of reinforcing at corners, especially at re-entrant or opening corners. The inclusion of fillets and splay bars in the case of reversed $L$ bases is recommended.
j) In the case of cantilever walls, place the vertical steel on the outer layer to take maximum advantage of the available lever arm. Horizontal bars may be placed on outside for exposed faces.
k) Ensure that provision is made for the structure above or beyond the wall where the required information relating to the continuity of the reinforcing must be provided.

Fig. 11.9 L-Walls (Distribution Bars Omitted FOR CLARITY)

Fig. 11.10 T-Walls (Distribution Bars Omitted for Clarity)


Fig. I 1 Reversed L-Bases (Distribution Bars Omitted for Clarity)
m) Note that the radius of bends for the main tensile bars is critical and should be at least 7.5 bar diameters.
n) If problems are encountered in the accommodation of bars at the intersection of the base and wall, consider reducing the bar diameters and increasing the member thickness.
p) Kicker height below ground level should be a minimum of 150 mm .
q) Full contraction joints should only be used when it is predicted that shortening along the full length of the wall will be cumulative. Where necessary they should be detailed at 30 m centres. Movement joints should only be used when there is a risk of differential settlement between adjaeent members.
11.3.1 Counterfort Retaining Wall - Figure 11.13 shows an elevation and section of a typical counterfort retaining wall illustrating general arrangement of reinforcement.

As with the wall part, the bars projecting from the base into the counterfort act as starter bars and must be of sufficient length to allow for lapping. These bars will normally be $U$-shaped. The wall is anchored to the counterfort by extending the binders from the counterfort into the wall. Opportunity has also been taken in Fig. 11.13 of showing the steel arrangement in the wall where it is anchored to the counterfort. It will be

Note - Precise layout of reinforcement depends upon full analysis.

Fig. 11.12 Propped Retaining Walls
seen that the arrangement is exactly the same as for a continuous floor slab supported on beams, the beams being on the opposite side of the wall to that of the counterforts.

### 11.4 Shell and Folded Plate Structures

11.4.1 General - Shells and folded plates belong to the class of stressed skin structures which, because of their geometry and small flexural rigidity of the skin, tend to carry loads primarily by direct stresses acting on their plane. Different types of reinforced concrete shell and folded plate structures are in use in present day building practice for a variety of applications and give roofing of large column-free areas.

Cylindrical type shells are relatively common although shells of double curvature with the exception of domes have been introduced lately into building construction. However their use is limited as they demand exceptionally high degree of workmanship and costly formwork.

Folded plate structures are composed of rectangular plates/slabs connected along the edges in such a way as to develop special rigidity

of component parts. Their structural behaviour consists of transverse slab action by which the loads are carried to the joints, and longitudinal plate action by which they are finally transmitted to the transverses. Because of its great depth and small thickness, each plate offers considerable resistance to bending in its own plane.

Folded plates are often competitive with shells for covering large column free areas. They usually

Fig. 11.13 Typical Details of a Counterfort Retaining Wall
consume relatively more materials compared to shells, but this disadvantage is often offset by the simpler formwork required for their construction: The added advantage of folded plate design is that its analysis is simpler compared to that of shells.

For detailing of reinforcement in shells and folded plates, the provisions of 'IS : 2210-1962 Criteria for the design of reinforced concrete shell structures and folded plates' are normally followed.
11.4.2 Diameter and Spacing of Reinforcement - The following diameters of bars may be provided in the body of the shell/plate. Large diameters may be provided in the thickened portions. Reinforcement in the form of welded wire fabric may also be used to satisfy design requirements:
a) Minimum diameter: 6 mm
b) Maximum diameter:

1) 10 mm for shells between 4 and 5 cm in thickness,
2) 12 mm for shells between 5 and 6.5 cm in thickness, and
3) 16 mm for shells above 6.5 cm in thickness.

The maximum spacing of reinforcement in any direction in the body of the shell/plate shall be limited to five times the thickness of the shell and in the area of unreinforced panels to 15 times the square of thickness.

The cover requirements to reinforcement shall be as per slabs.
11.4.3 Reinforcement in Shells - The ideal arrangement would be to lay reinforcement in the shell to follow isotatics, that is, directions of the principal tensile stresses assumed to act at the middle surface of the plate. However, for practical purposes, one of the following methods may be used:

One is the diagonal grid at $45^{\circ}$ to the axes of the shell, and in the other the rectangular grid in which the reinforcing bars run parallel to the edges of the shell. The rectangular grid needs additional reinforcement at $45^{\circ}$ near the supports to take up the tension due to shear.
11.4.3.1 In the design of the rectangular grid for cylindrical shells, the reinforcement shall be usually divided into the following three groups:
a) Longitudinal reinforcement to take up the longitudinal stress $T_{s}$;
b) Shear reinforcement to take up the principal tension caused by shear $S$; and
c) Transverse reinforcement to resist $T_{y}$ and $M_{y}$.

11.4.3.2 Longitudinal reinforcement shall be provided at the junction of the shell and the traverse to resist the logitudinal moment $M_{x}$. Where $M_{x}$ is ignored in the analysis, nominal reinforcement shall be provided.
11.4.3.3 To ensure monolithic connection between the shell and the edge members, the shell reinforcement shall be adequately anchored into the edge members and traverses or vice-versa by providing suitable dowel bars from the edge members and traverses to lap with the shell reinforcement.
11.4.3.4 Thickness - Thickness of shells shall not be normally less than 50 mm if singly curved and 40 mm if doubly curved. Shells are usually thickned to some distance from their junction with edge members and traverses. The thickening is usually of the order of 30 percent of the shell thickness. In the case of singly curved shells, the distance over which the thickening is made should be between $0.38 \sqrt{R d}$ and $0.76 \sqrt{R d}$, where $R$ and $d$ are the radius and thickness, respectively. For double curved shells, this distance will depend upon the geometry of the shell and boundry conditions.

### 11.4.4 Reinforcement in Folded Plates

11.4.4.1 Transverse reinforcement Transverse reinforcement shall follow the crosssection of the folded plate and shall be designed to resist the transverse moment.
11.4.4.2 Longitudinal reinforcement Longitudinal reinforcement, in general, may be provided to take up the longitudinal tensile stresses in individual slabs. In folded plates which are like beams, the longitudinal reinforcement may be provided for the overall bending moment on the span treating the folded plate as a beam. The section of the concrete and transverse reinforcement at the joint shall be checked for shear stress caused by edge sheer forces.
11.4.4.3 Reinforcement bars shall preferably be placed, as close as possible so that the steel is well distributed in the body of the slab. Nominal reinforcement consisting of 10 mm bars may be provided in the compression zones at about 20 cm centre-to-centre.
11.4.4.4 Thickness - The thickness of folded plates shall not normally be less than 75 mm . It is sometimes advantageous, while using the trough shape, to make the horizontal plates thicker than the inclined nnes.
11.4.5 Typical details of placing reinforcement in shells and folded plates are shown in Fig. 11.14 to 11.17 .
11.5 Reservoirs and Tanks - The reservoirs and tanks for storage of liquids can be square, rectangular, circular or hexagonal in plan with a roof over them. One of the important detailing considerations is the sealing of the construction joints and the same should be detailed on the drawing. The grade of concrete below M 20 shall not be used for sections of thickness equal to or less than 450 mm . Tanks shall generally be designed as uncracked section.
11.5.1 Cover-Minimum cover to reinforcement of members on faces either in contact with the liquid or enclosing space above the liquid (such as inner face of roof slab), should be 25 mm or the diameter of the main bar, whichever is greater. In the presence of sea water, soils and water of corrosive character, the cover shall be increased by 12 mm but this additional cover should not be taken into account for design calculations.
11.5.1.1 For faces away from the liquid and for parts of the structure not in contact with the liquid, the cover shall conform to requirements of Section 4.
11.5.2 Minimum Reinforcement - The minimum reinforcement in walls, floors and roofs in each of two directions at right angles shall have an area of 0.3 percent of the concrete section in that direction for sections up to 100 mm thick. For sections of thickness greater than 100 mm and less than 450 mm the minimum reinforcement in each of the two directions shall be linearly reduced from 0.3 percent for 100 mm thick section to 0.2 percent for 450 mm thick section. For sections of thickness greater than 450 mm , minimum reinforcement in each of the two directions shall be kept at 0.2 percent. In concrete sections of thickness 225 mm or greater, two layers of reinforcement shall be placed one near each face of the section to make up the minimum reinforcement.
11.5.2.1 The minimum reinforcement specified in 11.5 .2 may be decreased by 20 percent in case of high strength deformed bars.
11.5.2.2 In special circumstances such as tanks resting on ground floor slabs, percentage of steel less than that specified above may be provided.

### 11.5.3 Joints

11.5.3.1 General - This clause defines the types of joint which may be required in liquidretaining structures. The types of joints are illustrated in Fig. 11.18 and are only intended to be diagrammatic. The location of all joints should be decided by the engineer and shall be detailed on the drawings.

### 11.5.3.2 Types of joint

a) Construction joint - A construction joint is a joint in the concrete introduced for

11.14B REINFORCEMENT NEAR AN INTERMEDIATE EDGE MEMBER
11.14C REINFORCEMENT NEAR AN INTERMEDIATE DIAPHRAGM

Fig. 11.14 Typical Management of Bars in a Long Barrel Shell

11.15A AT EDGE MEMBERS
11.15B ABOVE INTERMEDIATE DIAPHRAGMS

Fig. 11.15 Typical Details of a Short Barrel Shell.

Fig. 11.16 Reinforcement in a Dome


ELEVATION SHOWING PROFILE

HALF PLAN OF FOLDED PLATE ROOF


SECTIONAL ELEVATION OF DIAPHRAGM

Fig. 11.17A


# SECTION-AA 


SECTION-BB

Fig. 11.17
convenience in construction at which measures are taken to achieve subsequent continuity with no provision for further relative moment. A typical application is between two successive lifts in a tank wall (see Fig. 11.18A).
b) Movement joint - A movement joint is a specially formed joint intended to accommodate relative movement between adjoining parts of a structure, special provision being made for maintaining the water-tightness of the joint. Movement joints may be of the following types:

1) Contraction joint - This is a movement joint which has a deliberate discontinuity
but no initial gap between the concrete on both sides of the joint. The joint is intended to permit contraction of the concrete.

A distinction should be made between a complete contraction joint (see Fig. 11.18C), in which both the concrete and reinforcement are interrupted, and a partial contraction joint (see Fig. 11.18B), in which only the concrete is interrupted while the reinforcement is continued through the joint.
2) Expansion joint - This is a movement joint which has complete discontinuity in

both reinforcement and concrete and is intended to accommodate either expansion or contraction of the structure (see Fig. 11.18D).
3) Sliding joint - This is a movement joint which has complete discontinuity in both reinforcement and concrete. Special provision is made to facilitate relative moment in the plane of the joint. A typical application is between wall and floor in some cylindrical tank designs.

### 11.5.4 Rectangular Tanks

11.5.4.1 General - Rectangular water tanks are generally analyzed in accordance with IS: 3370 (Part 4)-1967 Code of practice for concrete structures for storage of liquids: Part 4 Design tables'. This code gives tables for moment coefficients and shear coefficients for fixed wall panels along vertical edges but having different end conditions at top and bottom. In arriving at these coefficients, the slabs have been assumed to act as thin plates under various edge conditions given in the code.

Fig. 11.18A A Construction Joint
11.18B PARTIAL CONTRACTION JOINT
11.18C COMPLETE CONTRACTION JOINT

Fig. 11.18 Types of Joints (To Illustrate Basic Principles) (Continued)

11.18D EXPANSION JOINT

Fig. 11.18 Types of Joint (To Illustrate Basic Principles)

In the plan, the corners restrain the walls under pressure from their tendency to bend outward (see Fig. 11.19). This produces tension zones as shown in Fig. 11.19, at the middle of each outer face of wall and on each side of corners on inner wall faces. I hese tension portions shall be provided with horizontal steel in addition to that required to reinforce the vertical cantilever effect of walls. The general arrangement of bars in a rectangular tank resting on beams is shown in Fig. 11.20.

When the tank is below ground, the dispersion of steel in the wall depends on the bending moment diagram for internal water pressure and external earth/water pressure.
11.5.4.2 Base reinforcement - The bottom slab of a tank resting on ground shall be doubly reinforced with horizontal reinforcement at the top and bottom of the slab. This is required to cater for the downward pressure when reservoir is full and upward ground pressure when empty. A typical reinforcement detail is shown in Fig. 11.21. The use of dowel bars (starter bars) to the walls shall depend on whether the tank is shallow or deep.

The main and distribution bars in the base shall be placed as per slabs. If the walls are high and long then counterfort or buttress walls shall be used.
11.5.4.3 Roof joint - To avoid the possibility of sympathetic cracking, it is important to ensure that movement joints in the roof correspond with those in walls if roofs and walls are monolithic. If, however, provision is made by means of a sliding joint for movement between the roof and the wall, correspondence of joints is not so important.
11.5.5 Circular Tanks - Circular water tanks are generally analyzed in accordance with IS : 3370 (Part 4)-1967. This code gives tables for moment coefficients and shear coefficients for different end conditions at top and bottom.
11.5.5.1 Wall reinforcement - The horizontal hoop reinforcement in the circular tanks are provided either in one layer (for small tanks) or in two layers (for large tanks). Typical details are shown in Fig. 11.22.

The spacing of hoop reinforcement is increased from bottom to top of the wall to allow for reduction in pressure. Practically it can be varied at every 1.0 to 1.2 m .

The maximum and minimum spacing of the hoop steel and the proportions of distribution steel used will be similar to that of floor slab. The wall thickness shall be taken as equivalent to the floor thickness. The laps shall be provided in the main hoop steel in accordance with Section 4. For continuity of reinforcement between the base and the wall diagonal corner reinforcement shall be provided.
11.5.5.2 Base reinforcement - The base of. the circular tank shall be doubly reinforced to resist the downward pressure when full and upward soil pressure when empty.

The best reinforcement for the base is a square mesh fabric and this does not require a detailed plan. When base reinforcement is provided with corner bars, the details of reinforcement shall be shown giving details of corner bars (see Fig. 11.23).

It shall be advisable to specify that main bars in the top layer shall be placed at right angles to


Fig. 11.19 Sketch Showing Deformation of Rectangular Tank Under Internal PRESSURE
those in the bottom layer and that the position of overlaps, if required, will be staggered.
11.5.6 Overhead Tanks-Circular and Intze - A water tower is a typical type of the overhead tank. The only difference between this type of tank and one constructed at ground level, is in the method of support.
11.5.6.1 Roofs - The reservoirs and tanks shall be provided with roof and will be detailed as a normal slab supported on beams and columns or a flat slab supported on columns alone.

In a reservoir that is roofed over, it is possible that the side walls may not act as a cantilever walls but as vertical slabs like basement walls. Then the walls shall be detailed as a slab spanning vertically between the reservoir base and roof. Figure 11.24 shows the typical arrangement of bars (cross-section) in a Intze tank.
11.6 Reinforced Concrete Hinges - Many reinforced concrete structures, such as bridges and portal frames, are designed on the premise that parts of the structure act as hinges. In very large structures, the use of a normal metal hinge would be very expensive and it is, therefore, more economical to form a hinge using reinforcing bars. This is possible because the actual rotation required to satisfy the condition is very small.
11.6.1 Figure 11.25 gives details of three typical RC hinges used at supports.
11.6.1.1 Figure 11.25A is a type of reinforced concrete hinge suitable for a large portal frame or vertical support to a long bridge. The resilient material placed between the member and its foundation can be bituminous felt, lead, rubber or plastic. When the type of hinge is detailed make sure that the hinge reinforcing bars are adequately held in place by binders or hoops as shown. Also the area of concrete marked $A$ is sufficient to transfer the whole of the compressive force from the member to the foundation.

The Mesnager hinge shown in Fig. 11.25B has a short portion reduced in cross-section to about one-third of the width. The narrow concrete section is heavily reinforced, and provided with closely spaced binders or hoops. The considered hinge has spiral reinforcement as shown in Fig. 11.25C. If the section of the hinge is wide then extra spirals must be detailed. The gap formed between the abutment and the member is filled with suitable flexible material.
11.6.2 Crown Hinges - These are inserted into certain types of arch structures known as three-hinges, or pinned arches. Figure 11.26 gives general details for this type of hinge.

In the Mesnager hinge shown in Fig. 11.26B, the main reinforcement crosses at an angle of $60^{\circ}$ and the gap is filled with a waterproof, resilient material. The joint develops considerable resistance against thrust and shear, yet has little resistance to rotation. Figure 11.26C shows a modification to the Mesnager type of hinge-the considered hinge. This only acts as a hinge during the construction of the arch. When the formwork is removed and the arch drops slightly under its own action the main reinforcing bars are welded together and the hinge is concreted in to form a permanent joint.
11.7 Concrete Pipes - Reinforced cement concrete pipes are widely used for water mains, sewers, culverts and in irrigation. When used for carrying highly acidic sewage or industrial wastes, necessary precautions shall have to be taken against chemical attack and corrosion.

Reinforced concrete pipes either spun or cast shall be designed such that the maximum tensile stress in the circumferential steel due to the specified hydrostatic test pressure does not exceed the limit of $125 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ in the case of mild steel rods, $140 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ in the case of cold-drawn steel wires and high strength deformed bars/wires.

The barrel thickness shall be such that under the specified hydrostatic test pressure, the maximum tensile stress in concrete when considered as effective to take stress along with the tensile reinforcement shall not exceed $2 \mathrm{~N} / \mathrm{mm}^{2}$ but the wall thickness shall not be less than those given in IS : 458-1971 'Specification for precast concrete pipes (with and without reinforcement (second revision)'


# SECTION-AA 


## SECTION-BB

Fig. 11.20 Rectangular Tank Supporting on Beams General Arrangement of REINFORCEMENT


Fig. 11.21 Rectangular Tank Restrained at Base with Thickening at the baseTypical Cross Section
11.22A SECTION THROUGH A CIRCULAR TANK WITH HOOP REINFORCEMENT IN A SINGLE LANGER
11.22B CIRCULAR SLABS

Fig. 11.22 Circular Tank

DETAILS OF MAIN BARS PLACED ALONG HERE

Fig. 11.23 Typical Arrangement of Bars in a Circular Base


Fig. 11.24 Typical Arrangement of Bars in a Intze Tank
11.7.1 Reinforcement - The reinforcement (circumferential and longitudinal) shall extend throughout the length of the pipe. The pitch of the circumferential reinforcement shall be neither more than 10 cm or four times the thickness of barrel, whichever is less, nor less than the maximum size of aggregate plus the diameter of the bar used. There is no internationally accepted design method for concrete pipes. Design had to be based on both practical experience and theory. Accordingly minimum quantity of steel has been specified in IS : 458-1971. All pipes with wall thickness 75 mm and above shall have double reinforcement cage and the amount of hoop steel in the outer cage shall be 75 percent of the mass of the hoop steel in inner cage.

Note - The ends of concrete pipes shall be suitable for butt, flush collar, spigot and socket, rebated or flexible rubber ring joints. All pressure pipes shall have flexible rubber ring joint. Dimensions of collars shall be according to IS : 458-1971. The reinforcement for the collars shall be same as that provided in the nearest nominal bore of the pipe and the longitudinal reinforcement shall be proportional to the length of the collar. The collars shall be spun up to 1200 mm diameter pipes. Rebated joints shall be used in case of pipes having wall thickness of 110 mm or more.

A typical arrangement of reinforcement is shown in Fig. 11.27.

Note - Diagonal reinforcement may be provided at 15 percent of longitudinals in pipes for which the cages are not welded so as to help in binding the cage securely.

Fig. 11.25 Reinforced Concrete Hinges at StiPports

11.26 A

Fig. 11.26 Crown Hinges
11.7.2 Cover-Clear cover to any reinforcement should not normally be less than the following:

| Barrel Thickness | Nominal <br> Clear Cover |
| :--: | :--: |
| mm | mm |
| Up to and including 25 | 6 |
| Over 25 up to and including 30 | 8 |
| Over 30 up to and including 75 | 10 |
| Over 75 | 15 |
| As spigot steps | 6 |

Note - For class NP4 pipes (in accordance with IS : 458-1978, the minimum cover shall be 20 mm .

### 11.8 Machine Foundations

11.8.1 Foundations for Impact Type Machines (Hammer Foundations) [IS : 2974 (Part 2)-1980 'Code of Practice for Design and Construction of Machine Foundations: Part 2 Foundations for Impact Type Machines(Second Revision)']-The foundation block should be made of reinforced concrete. It is desirable to cast the entire foundation block in one operation. If a construction joint is unavoidable, the plane of the joint shall be horizontal and measures shall be
taken to provide a proper joint. The following measures are recommended:

Dowels of 12 or 16 mm diameter should be embedded at 60 mm centres to a depth of at least 300 mm at both sides of the joint. Before placing the next layer of concrete, the previously laid surface should be roughened, thoroughly cleaned, washed by a jet of water and then covered by a layer of rich $1: 2$ cement grout ( 1 cement : 2 sand), 2 cm thick. Concrete should be placed not later than 2 hours after the grout is laid.
11.8.1.1 Reinforcement shall be placed along the three axis and also diagonally to prevent shear failure (see Fig. 11.28). Additional reinforcement shall be provided at the top side of the foundation block than at the other sides. Reinforcement at the top may be provided in the form of layers of grills made of 16 mm diameter bars suitably placed to allow easy pouring of concrete. The topmost layers of reinforcement shall be provided with a cover of at least 5 cm . The reinforcement provided shall be at least 25 $\mathrm{kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete.

Figure 11.28 shows typical reinforcement details of a hammer foundation block.

11.27A SINGLE LAYER
11.27B DOUBLE LAYER

Fig. 11.27 Typical Details of Pipes
11.8.2 Foundations for Rotary Type Machines of Low Frequency [IS : 2974(Part 4)-1979]-The amount of minimum reinforcement for block foundation shall be $25 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete. The amount of minimum reinforcement for frame foundations shall be $40 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete for
base slab, $70 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete for columns and $90 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete for top slab.

Stirrups suitably spaced shall be provided to tie together the main longitudinal bars.


Fig. 11.28 Typical Reinforcement Detail

The minimum diameter of the mild steel bars shall be 12 mm and the maximum spacing shall be 200 mm .

The concrete cover for protection of reinforcement shall be 75 mm at the bottom, 50 mm on sides and 40 mm at the top.

Typical arrangement of reinforcements are shown in Fig. 11.29 to 11.31 .
11.8.3 Foundations for Reciprocating Type Machines [IS: 2974 (Part 1)-1982].
11.8.3.1 Minimum reinforcement in block foundations - Minimum reinforcement in the concrete block shall be not less than $25 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$. For machines requiring special design considerations of foundations, like machines pumping explosive gases, the reinforcement shall be not less than $40 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$.

The minimum reinforcement in the block shall usually consist of 12 mm bars spaced at 200/250 mm centre-to-centre extending both vertically and horizontally near all the faces of the foundation block.
11.8.3.2 The following points shall be considered while arranging the reinforcements:
a) The ends of mild steel (if used) shall always be hooked irrespective of whether they are designed for tension or compression;
b) Reinforcement shall be used at all faces;
c) If the height of foundation block exceeds one metre, shrinkage reinforcement shall be placed at suitable spacing in all three directions; and
d) Reinforcement shall be provided around all pits and openings and shall be equivalent to 0.50 to 0.75 percent of the cross-sectional area of the opening.

A typical arrangement of reinforcement in a reciprocating machine foundation is shown in Fig. 11.32.
11.8.4 Foundations for Rotary Type Machines (Medium and High Frequency) [IS: 2974 (Part 3)-1975 'Code of Practice for Design and Construction of Machine Foundations: Part 3 Foundation for Rotary Type of Machines (Medium and High Frequency) (First Revision)].
11.8.4.1 The vertical reinforcing bars of the column shall have sufficient embedment in the base slab to develop the required stresses.
11.8.4.2 All units of foundation shall be provided with double reinforcement. Reinforcements shall be provided along the other two sides of cross-sections of beams and columns, even if they are not required by design calculations so that symmetric reinforcement will be ensured in opposite sides.
11.8.4.3 The amount of minimum reinforcement for major structures components of the framework shall be as follows:
a) Base slab
$40 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete
b) Columns
$70 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete
c) Top table
$90 \mathrm{~kg} / \mathrm{m}^{3}$ of concrete
(slab and beam)
Typical arrangement of reinforcement is shown in Fig. 11.33.
11.8.4.4 Stirrups suitably spaced shall be provided to account for the entire shear in the foundation elements.
11.8.4.5 The minimum diameter of longitudinal steel for beams and columns should be selected so that the maximum spacing of these bars shall not be more than 150 mm .
11.8.4.6 Reinforcement cover-Unless specified otherwise, the concrete cover for reinforcement protection shall be as follows:
a) Base slab
100 mm for top, bottom and sides
b) Columns and 50 mm on sides pedestals
c) Beams
40 mm on sides
11.8.4.7 Minimum grade of concrete for foundation shall be not less than M20.
11.8.4.8 Construction joints - The base slab shall be cast in a single pour. A properly designed construction joint shall be provided between the base slab and the columns.

Wherever intermediate decks exist and construction joints are to be provided, the subsequent set of construction joints shall be provided at the top of each such intermediate deck.

In case there is no intermediate deck, continuous concreting shall be done for the columns and the upper deck.


# SECTION・AA 


Fig. 11.29
11.9 Shear Walls - In tall buildings, rather than relaying on columns alone for resisting moments due to lateral forces, it is common practice to provide a core of shear walls to take major part of lateral force against the building. Figure 11.32 shows the structural effects on the wall, and since the wind can act in either direction, compression bands occur at both ends of the wall.

The general principal being the cross-sectional area of the concrete alone must resist the shear forces imposed at joints with the slab whilst the remainder acts like a beam on edge spanning between floors.

Reinforcement in the compression band must be tied in two directions as in the case of column bars and compression beam steel.


Fig. 11.30 Typical Foundation for Crusting Mill (Pulverizer Unit)


Fig. 11.31 Typical Foundation for Primary Air Fan


Fig. 11.32 Typical Foundation for Instrument Air Compressor
11.33A TYPICAL LONGITUDINAL SECTION THROUGH A TURBO GENERATOR FOUNDATION

Fig. 11.33 Typical Details of a Turbo Generator Foundation (Continuted)


Fig. 11.33 Typical Details of a Turbo Generator Foundation

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 12 

Ductility Requirements of Earthquake Resistant Buildings

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

# SECTION 12 

## DUCTILITY REQUIREMENTS OF EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT BUILDINGS

12.0 General - The primary members of structure such as beams and columns are subjected to stress reversals from earthquake loads. The reinforcement provided shall cater to the needs of reversal of moments in beams and columns, and at their junctions.

Earthquake motion often induces forces large enough to cause inelastic deformations in the structure. If the structure is brittle, sudden failure could occur. But if the structure is made to behave ductile, it will be able to sustain the earthquake effects better with some deflection $(\Delta m)$ larger than the yield deflection $(\Delta y)$ by absorption of energy. Therefore, besides the design for strength of the frame, ductility is also required as an essential element for safety from sudden collapse during severe shocks. It has also been observed during past earthquakes that structures designed and built for low seismic coefficients survived severe earthquakes with little damage because of energy absorption in plastic deformations.

In zones where risk of major damage from earthquake loads is possible, ductile frame is required in accordance with IS : 4326-1976 'Code of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of buildings (first revision)'. These provisions are generally applicable to all seismic zones but its importance is greater where severe earthquake loadings will become much more significant than other concurrent loads. Accordingly the Code makes it obligatory that in all cases where the design seismic coefficient [see IS : 1893-1976 'Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures (third revision)'] is 0.05 or more (which invariably includes zones IV and V) ductility provisions specified in IS : 4326-1976 shall be adopted. The ductility requirements will be deemed to be satisfied if the conditions given in the following clauses are achieved.

### 12.1 Flexural Members

12.1.1 The top as well as bottom steel reinforcement shall consist of at least two bars each throughout the length of the member, and the steel ratio $\rho$ on either face (both on compression and tension face) shall not be less than as given below:

For M 15 concrete and plain mild steel bars, $\rho_{\text {min }}=0.0035$

For other concrete and steel reinforcement, $\rho_{\text {min }}$ $=0.06 F_{\mathrm{c}} / F_{\mathrm{y}}$
where

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \rho=A_{\mathrm{s}} / b d \\
& F_{\mathrm{c}}=28 \text {-day cube crushing strength of concrete, } \\
& F_{\mathrm{y}}=\text { yield stress of reinforcing steel, } \\
& A_{\mathrm{s}}=\text { area of steel on a face, } \\
& b=\text { breadth of beam web, and } \\
& d=\text { effective depth of section. }
\end{aligned}
$$

12.1.2 The maximum tensile steel ratio on any face at any section shall not exceed the following:

For M 15 concrete and plain mild steel bars, $\rho_{\text {max }}=\rho_{\mathrm{c}}+0.011$

For other concrete and mild steel reinforcement, $\rho_{\text {max }}=\rho_{\mathrm{c}}+0.19 F_{\mathrm{c}} / F_{\mathrm{y}}$

For concrete reinforced with coldworked deformed bars, $\rho_{\text {max }}=\rho_{\mathrm{c}}+0.15 F_{\mathrm{c}} / F_{\mathrm{y}}$
where
$\rho_{\mathrm{c}}=$ actual steel ratio on the compression face.
12.1.3 When a beam frames into a column, both the top and bottom bars of the beam shall be anchored into the column so as to develop their full tensile strength in bond beyond the section of the beam at the face of the column. Where beams exist on both sides of the column, both face bars of beams shall be taken continuously through the column.

Note - To avoid congestion of steel in a column in which the beam frames on one side only, it will be preferable to use U-type of bars spliced outside the column instead of anchoring the bars in the column.

Figure 12.1 shows the typical detail for a beam framing into column from one side or two sides. Such an arrangement will ensure a ductile junction and provide adequate anchorage of beam reinforcement into columns. Top and bottom longitudinal steel for beams framing into both sides of column should extend through the column without splicing.
12.1.4 The tensile steel bars shall not be spliced at sections of maximum tension and the splice shall be contained within at least two closed stirrups (see Fig. 12.2).
12.1.5 The web reinforcement in the form of vertical stirrups shall be provided so as to develop the vertical shears resulting from all ultimate vertical loads acting on the beam plus those which


Fig. 12.1 Example of Typical Bar Details for Special Ductile Moment Kesisting Frames (Column Details Excluded)

Fig. 12.2 Closed Stirrups

Fig. 12.3 Dimension $h$ in Rectangular Hoop
can be produced by the plastic moment capacities at the ends of the beam. The spacings of the stirrups shall not exceed $d / 4$ in a length equal to $2 d$ near each end of the beam and $d / 2$ in the remaining length (see Fig. 12.1). It is important to note that in no case shear failure should preceed flexural failure.
12.1.6 Because of the possibility of reversal of shears in the beams, the earthquake shears shall be provided for by the vertical stirrups as they will be effective both for upward and downword shears. Where diagonal bars are also used, their
maximum shear carrying capacity will be restricted below 50 percent of the design shear. Closely spaced stirrups are preferable.

### 12.2 Columns Subjected to Axial Load and Bending

12.2.1 If the average axial stress $P / A$ on the column under earthquake condition is less than $0.1 F_{\mathrm{c}}$, the column reinforcement will be designed according to requirements of flexural members given in 12.1. But if $P / A \geqslant 0.1 F_{\mathrm{c}}$, special confining reinforcement will be required at the column ends as given in 12.2 .2 to 12.2 .4 .
12.2.2 The cross-sectional area of the bar forming circular hoops or a spiral used for confinement of concrete will be:

$$
A_{\mathrm{sh}}=0.08 \mathrm{~s} D_{\mathrm{k}} \frac{F_{\mathrm{c}}}{F_{\mathrm{y}}}\left(\frac{A}{A_{\mathrm{k}}}-1\right)
$$

where
$A_{\text {sh }}=$ area of bar cross-section,
$s=$ pitch of spiral or spacing of hoops,
$D_{\mathrm{k}}=$ diameter of core measured to the outside of the spiral or hoop,
$F_{\mathrm{c}}=28$-day cube crushing strength of concrete,
$F_{\mathrm{y}}=$ yield stress of reinforcing steel (hoop or stirrups),
$A=$ gross concrete area of the column section, and
$A_{\mathrm{k}}=$ area of core $=\frac{\pi}{4} D_{\mathrm{k}}^{2}$.

In the case of rectangular closed stirrups used in rectangular sections, the area of bar shall be:

$$
A_{\mathrm{th}}=0.16 \quad \text { s } h \frac{F_{\mathrm{c}}}{F_{\mathrm{c}}}\left(\frac{A}{A_{\mathrm{k}}}-1\right)
$$

where
$h=$ longer dimension of the rectangular confining stirrup, and
$A_{\mathrm{k}}=$ area of confined concrete core in the rectangular stirrup measured to its outside dimensions.
Note - The dimension $h$ of the stirrup could be reduced by introducing links at intermediate points as shown in Fig. 12.3. In this case also $A_{\mathrm{k}}$ shall be measured as overall core area regardless of the stirrup arrangement. Each end of the intermediate tie shall engage the periphery hoop with a standard semicircular hook and shall be secured to a longitudinal bar to prevent displacement of the intermediate tie during construction.
12.2.3 The special confining steel, where required, shall be provided above and below the beam connections in a length of the column at each end which shall be the largest of:
a) $1 / 6$ of clear height of the column,
b) larger lateral dimension of the column, and
c) 450 mm .

The spacing of the hoops or closed stirrups used as special confining steel shall not exceed 10 cm (see Fig. 12.4 and 12.5).
12.2.4 Shear reinforcement shall be provided in the columns to resist the shear resulting from the lateral and vertical loads at ultimate load condition of the frame. The specing of shear reinforcement shall not exceed $d / 2$, where $d$ is the effective depth of column measured from compression fibre to the tension steel.
12.3 Beam-Column Connections - Joints between exterior columns and adjoining flexural members shall be confined by transverse column reinforcement through the joint. Such reinforcement shall consist of circular hoops or spiral in the case of circular columns and rectangular closed stirrups in the case of rectangular columns, as required at the column ends. This is required because on exterior or corner columns the joint core is not confined by flexural members on all sides. To provide some measure of confinement in these situations giving some strength against brittle failure in the joint core, transverse reinforcement as required at the column ends is continued through the joint core (see Fig. 12.4 and 12.5).

The transverse reinforcement is required at the end of the column even if the column is confined

Fig. 12.4 Beam Column Joint at External Columns